Satellites spy Antarctic 'upside-down ice canyon'
Scientists have identified a way in which the effects of Antarctic melting can be enhanced.
Their new satellite observations of the Dotson Ice Shelf show its losses, far from being even, are actually focused on a long, narrow sector.
In places, this has cut an inverted canyon through more than half the thickness of the shelf structure.
If the melting continued unabated, it would break Dotson in 40-50 years, not the 200 years currently projected.
"That is unlikely to happen because the ice will respond in some way to the imbalance," said Noel Gourmelen, from the University of Edinburgh, UK.
"It's possible the area of thinning could widen or the flow of ice could change. Both would affect the rate at which the channel forms.
"But the important point here is that Dotson is not a flat slab and it can be much thinner in places than we think it is and much closer to a stage where it might experience major change."
Dr Gourmelen's new study, published in Geophysical Research Letters, uses the European Space Agency's Cryosat and Sentinel-1 spacecraft to make a detailed examination of the thickness and movement of Dotson.
The 70km by 40km ice shelf is the floating projection of two glaciers, Kohler and Smith. As they stream off the west of Antarctica, their fronts lift up and join together, pushing out over the Amundsen Sea.
The shelf acts as a buttress to the ice behind. If Dotson were not present, Kohler and Smith would flow much faster, dumping more of their mass in the ocean, contributing to sea-level rise.
Satellites have long tracked the behaviour of the shelf, but in Cryosat in particular researchers now have an altimeter instrument that is able to retrieve much higher-resolution elevation information than ever before.
Taking the period of its observations from 2010-2016, Dr Gourmelen's team can see that Dotson's surface is lowering on average by about 26cm per year, which suggests the roughly 400m-thick shelf as a whole is thinning by about 2.5m per year.
But Cryosat's sharper vision also reveals that this thinning is concentrated at a surface depression that is roughly 5km wide and 60km long.
It extends from the point where the glacier ice starts to float as it comes off the land, all the way out to the front edge of the shelf where icebergs are calved into the ocean.
What the team is able to show is that this surface depression corresponds to an incised canyon on the underside of the shelf.
The average width of this inverted gorge is 10-15km but it cuts up into the shelf by as much as 200m in places. The Edinburgh-led group says all the evidence suggests warm water from the deep ocean around Antarctica has got under the shelf to melt out the canyon.
"We say warm; it's 0.6-0.7 degrees," explains Dr Gourmelen. "It makes its way into the cavity under the shelf along a trough to the grounding line, and then it starts to rotate clockwise and rises. And it comes out on the west side. That's where we see the thinning and the basal melt."
This export of fresh melt-water from the underside of the shelf carries with it a lot of iron from rocks scraped from the continent, and drives strong growth in plankton and other biological activity in front of Dotson.
Just a simple forward projection using the pattern and rates of thinning observed by Cryosat and Sentinel-1 in this study would lead to complete melt-through of Dotson's front in 20 or so years, and its rear in about 40 years.
That is on the order of 170 years earlier than Dotson would thin to zero using the ice-shelf-averaged thinning rate. But as previously stated - the shelf is not a static structure and it will react to the formation of the canyon.
"An ice shelf can be a complicated thing," says co-author Prof Andy Shepherd from Leeds University and principal scientific adviser on the Cryosat mission.
"As you thin them it reduces the traction on the feeding glaciers, allowing those glaciers to speed up; and as they speed up, they should put more ice into the ice shelf so that it thickens again. It is supposed to be a stabilising effect."
Prof Shepherd said a new high-resolution swath mode used by Cryosat at Dotson was now being deployed elsewhere around Antarctica to look for more patterns of enhanced thinning on other ice shelves.

///
What to do if your child is overweight
One in ten young people in the UK, aged between five and 19, is obese, according to new research that looks at obesity trends in over 200 countries.
It's not always easy to tell if your child is overweight - especially as even slimmer people are heavier than they would have been 10 years ago.
Consultant paediatrician Prof Mary Rudolf, who advises the government on obesity, says many parents would not know that "a healthy 10-year-old's ribs should be clearly visible - many parents would consider that such a child was quite underweight".
How do you know if your child is obese?
The "most robust" way is to check their body mass index (BMI) to see if their weight falls within the healthy range for their height - according to the Department of Health.
All children in England are measured and weighed for their BMI in reception class (aged four to five) and in year six (aged 10 to 11), under the government's National Child Measurement Programme.
Some local authorities send letters informing parents of the result. Generally, the higher the BMI, the greater the risk of medical problems.
If your local authority does not do this, you can check your child's BMI using the NHS's BMI calculator - you will need to know their height and weight.
line break
How you can help if your child is obese:
Lead by example
Experts believe one of the most powerful ways to encourage your child to eat well and be active is to do so yourself, as children learn by example.
Research cited by the NHS in 2009 found that the risk of a girl being obese at the age of eight was significantly raised - a ten-fold increase in fact - if her mother was obese.
The risk for a boy was increased six-fold if his father was obese.
NHS Choices advises that any changes made to a child's diet and lifestyle are much more likely to be accepted if the changes involve the whole family.
Its list of 10 tips includes advice such as eating together at the table, banning sweetened drinks, preparing more meals at home or choosing healthier takeaways.
Encourage exercise
Children are recommended to have 60 minutes of exercise a day - but this does not have to be done all at once.
It can be done in several short 10 or five-minute bursts of activity throughout the day.
Overweight children do not need to do more exercise than slimmer children, as their extra body weight means they will naturally burn more calories for the same activity.
Swapping the car for walking or cycling on small journeys is seen as an easy way to get the whole family moving.
Eat healthily
Children, like adults, should aim to eat five or more portions of fruit and vegetables every day.
Experts say unsweetened 100% fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies should only count as one portion of a child's five a day, because of the high level of sugar they contain.
They recommend a combined total of no more than 150ml a day - which is one small glass.
This is because when fruit is blended or juiced it releases natural sugars which increase the risk of tooth decay, so it is also best to drink fruit juice or smoothies at meal times.
Limit sugar
The NHS says many children are getting half of their sugar intake from sweetened soft drinks and unhealthy snacks.
For example, one can of coke can have up to nine cubes of sugar in it.
But the maximum daily amounts of added sugar for children are:
4-6 years old - 5 cubes of sugar or 19 grams
7-10 years old - 6 cubes of sugar or 24 grams
over 11 - 7 cubes of sugar or 30 grams
Child-sized portions
There is little official guidance on precisely how much food children require.
But experts advise avoiding adult-sized plates for younger children as it encourages them to eat more than they need.
Other tips include starting meals with small servings and letting your child ask for more if they are still hungry.
It is also advised that children be encouraged to eat slowly, and not forced to finish everything on their plate. It also helps to have set meal times.
More sleep
Sleep is important for children as it has been shown that those who do not have the recommended amount of sleep are more likely to be overweight.
Researchers found that those children who had less sleep in their earlier years were at greater risk of having a higher BMI at age seven.
This link continued even when other risk factors, such as gender and physical activity, were accounted for in their research.
Using fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), poor sleep has been shown to affect the brain areas responsible for complex decision-making, and our response to rewards, causing us to favour unhealthy foods.
Less technology
Although getting the recommended amount of sleep at night is encouraged, sitting and lying around too much in the day makes children more likely to put on weight.
Experts advise that children should watch no more than two hours of television each day.
And parents are encouraged to remove all screens, including mobile phones, from their bedroom at night.
Talk and listen
Aisling Pigott, a paediatric dietitian and spokesperson for the British Dietetic Association, says it is important to "talk to children from a young age openly and honestly about food as a positive thing".
"Have open discussions about enjoying food, take the focus away from body image to health and wellbeing, as opposed to look and image," she says.
"Don't use negative words like 'fat' and 'ugly' with your children - don't talk about cutting down and not eating certain foods as it makes children want them more," she adds.
With older children there are many more influences so teenagers should be approached sensitively, Ms Pigott points out.
"Don't attack and don't talk about long-term consequences for their health because they don't care, as teenagers live in the here and now," she explains.
"Focus on how they look at the moment and help them work on gaining more positive self-esteem."
Overweight teenagers will display unhealthy eating behaviours - often restricting their food intake and then overeating.
Boosting their self esteem can work well in stabilising their eating habits, Ms Pigott says.
"Reassure them and remind them everyone is a different shape and size - and it's just about keeping within healthy norms."
///
North Yorkshire's The Black Swan 'best restaurant in world'
A village pub has been named the best restaurant in the world in an international poll based on customer reviews.
The Black Swan in Oldstead, North Yorkshire, beat Heston Blumenthal's The Fat Duck and Raymond Blanc's Le Manoir.
TripAdvisor said it was the first time a British restaurant had won the title since the awards began in 2012.
Blanc's Belmond Le Manoir Aux Quat'Saisons in Great Milton, Oxfordshire, came second.
The travel website said the winner was selected based on the millions of reviews and opinions collected on the site over a 12-month period.
The Black Swan, which has a Michelin star and 4 AA Rosettes, is a family-owned pub on the edge of the North York Moors, near Thirsk.
It is run by the UK's youngest Michelin-starred chef Tommy Banks, who won the accolade four years ago at the age of 24, and his brother James.
Head chef Tommy said: "Its a huge honour to win this award, but what makes it really special is that it's been awarded because of feedback from our customers."
Martín Berasategui in Spain has held the title since 2015.
Heston Blumenthal's The Fat Duck came 12th in the website's Travellers' Choice Favourite Fine Dining Restaurants Worldwide poll.
TripAdvisor said the awards differed from others as they were based on feedback from guests and "not based on a small judging panel".
///
The man diagnosed with pathological laughter
Paul Pugh was in the most critical meeting of his life. He was being told what his future would be like after receiving a brain injury in a brutal assault. He laughed the whole way through the discussion but, to him, it felt like he was sobbing. He would later be diagnosed with pathological laughter.
Pugh, now 37, had been on a night out with his Cwmaman Football Club teammates in January 2007 when he was targeted in an unprovoked attack on a cold January night.
As he left a pub in his home town of Ammanford in Carmarthenshire, west Wales, four men he didn't know rounded on him and repeatedly punched and kicked him.
Pugh's skull was fractured and he fell into a coma for more than two months. A blood clot which measured 10cm x 4cm formed on his brain and he was left with slurred speech, chronic fatigue and mobility difficulties which resulted in him having to use a wheelchair.
"I've had to learn to walk and talk again and come to terms with the fact that I will never fully recover," he says. "Life has been a struggle for me and my family, but we're ploughing through it."
Pugh spent 13 months in hospital, but it wasn't until month four that he had his first laughing fit.
"It was a serious meeting with my consultant, rehabilitation therapists and my family to discuss what my life and future was going to be like," he says.
"When they started talking about me, I was frightened and it triggered something off in my brain and I laughed right through the meeting.
"I was actually crying my eyes out, but it came out on the surface as laughter."
At first, no one understood his behaviour, his family even thought he was "making a scene in public, pleading for attention".
It took several years before Pugh's fits of "full on laughter" were diagnosed as pathological laughter or the Pseudobulbar Affect (PBA).
The condition arises when there is a disconnect between the frontal lobe of the brain - which keeps emotions in check - and the cerebellum and brain stem - which regulate the expression of emotion. It's a real crossed-wires moment.
PBA can affect those with neurological conditions or injuries such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, or Alzheimer's disease.
Andy Tyerman, consultant clinical neuropsychologist of brain injury charity Headway, says: "The term refers to uncontrolled expression of emotion that is disproportionate or inappropriate to the social context and may be inconsistent with what the person is actually feeling.
"A person might also appear very distressed about something that would previously have been only slightly upsetting."
In Pugh's case, he laughed when he thought he was crying.
"I know when I'm laughing or crying, but other people don't," he says. "Some have been upset and reacted by being sarcastic with me or even aggressive and try to hurt my feelings because they think I'm laughing at them.
"It's amazing how important laughing is. You take it for granted but it has a really powerful effect, if you share a joke with someone it's special."
Pugh says his family are very understanding. His mum has become his full-time carer to help with his mobility issues, his dad, aged 72, still works and his brothers - Simon and Matthew - have both had a hand in helping him over the past decade.
He says the diagnosis "hit me hard" and sometimes attracts unwanted attention but he can now sense when an episode is imminent.
"I feel a laugh coming a few seconds before it happens - sometimes I can control it but a blip can happen. The laugh doesn't last long, a minute at the most, but it can cause a lot of problems if people don't understand."
Pugh has developed his own method to avert an episode by "thinking of something or someone bad without giving it feeling" and estimates he can control nine out of 10 laughing fits.
It's been an "extremely tough 10 years" since the assault, he says.
He had to give up work as an electrician and now spends his time in therapy or visiting the charity Headway Carmarthenshire which, he says, gave him an "insight of being with people with brain injury" and reassurance he wasn't on his own.
"Since the incident we've met the most incredible people you'll ever meet, all wanting to help me," he says. "On the other side of the dice, I feel like I'm under house arrest because the injury affected my mobility and balance, therefore I need assistance whenever I go outdoors."
In 2014, Pugh started Paul's Pledge - a campaign to educate people about alcohol-fuelled violence which Dyfed-Powys Police is also involved in.
He makes visits to schools, colleges and youth clubs and has had an "absolutely fantastic" response because "they can see that it's real and not theatrical".
"This is my life now - I've moved on from what happened," he says. "There are many things I can't do - but this [campaign] I can do. I think it sends a powerful message to the world. I don't want to see anyone, nobody in the situation it left me and my family in."
The four men responsible for Pugh's attack were jailed for between nine months and four years.
Pugh says: "The one that kicked me in the head with full force from point blank range, almost killing me, was let out. What about me? Ten years later, I'm still serving my sentence."
///
Can we tell if Donald Trump has a high IQ?
Question: How often does President Trump talk about IQ?
Answer: All the time.
When Mr Trump recently boasted that his IQ was higher than Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's, it was part of a pattern.
In 2013, he tweeted that his IQ was "much higher" than Barack Obama and George W Bush.
He has also claimed a higher IQ than comedian Jon Stewart and British star of The Apprentice, Lord Sugar.
Despite this, Mr Trump has never revealed his own IQ. So can we work it out?
What is IQ?
An Intelligence Quotient is a score given to someone after taking an intelligence test.
There is no single "IQ test" - Mensa accepts results from more than 200 tests, including its own. Some tests last an hour, while some have no time limit.
Dr Frank Lawlis, the supervisory psychologist of American Mensa, says they usually test spatial, quantitative, and verbal skills.
Broadly, spatial questions are about shape and measurement; quantitative questions are mathematical; and verbal questions are about words - for example, how one word is similar to another.
Mensa accepts those who score in the top 2%. That equates - very roughly - to an IQ of 130.
Who were the smartest presidents?
"I don't recall ever coming across a list of presidents and their IQs," says Dr Barbara A Perry, director of presidential studies at the University of Virginia.
"But you can easily find a list of presidents inducted into Phi Beta Kappa in their universities."
Founded in 1776, Phi Beta Kappa honours "the best and brightest liberal arts and sciences undergraduates from 286 top schools across the nation".
Of the 44 presidents, 17 have been Phi Beta Kappa members. Bill Clinton, George H W Bush, and Jimmy Carter were the most recent.
Dr Perry puts forward, among others, Herbert Hoover ("a very, very bright scientist, a geologist"), Woodrow Wilson ("our only PhD president"), and William H Taft ("a brilliant lawyer").
And, although a president's IQ has never been confirmed, in 2006 the University of California estimated that John Quincy Adams was the most intelligent of all presidents.
Dr Perry also says some presidents have undeserved reputations.
"Gerald Ford was viewed as being a klutz, because he would trip in public, but that was so unfair.
"He had an undergraduate degree from the University of Michigan, where he was from, he was an Eagle Scout, he went to Yale Law School, and he was a star footballer on top of that."
She also says that intelligence is only part of what makes a good president.
"It was the Supreme Court justice Oliver Wendell Holmes who famously said Franklin Delano Roosevelt had 'a second class intellect but a first class temperament'.
"Roosevelt was re-elected in '36 by two-thirds of the electorate."
And who were the least smart?
"I would put Warren Harding in that category," says Dr Perry. "He was a journalist by training."
This is awkward...
"Some of my best friends are journalists!" says Dr Perry, laughing.
"And my brother is. But my point is, he wasn't from Harvard or Yale, and he wasn't a brilliant lawyer who ended up on the supreme court."
So where does Donald Trump fit in?
"If he ever releases his IQ, I just have a feeling - especially since he is daring Tillerson to release his - that it's higher than people would presume," says Dr Perry.
"People who don't like him say 'oh he's such an idiot, oh he's so stupid'. But I bet you it's higher than we might realise."
Professor Fred I Greenstein, professor of politics emeritus at Princeton University, lists six qualities that bear on presidential performance.
They are: public communication, organisational capacity, political skill, vision, cognitive style, and emotional intelligence.
"Trump scores low on emotional intelligence, cognitive style, vision, and organisational capacity," says Dr Perry.
"Where he has been superb, in order to win the presidency, is public communication and political skill."
Dr Perry also points out Mr Trump's business career - "he obviously had a certain native intelligence to be successful, such as he was" - and his degree from The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
But - whether Mr Trump's IQ is high or low - Dr Lawlis from Mensa says it doesn't tell you everything.
"If you take someone we consider to be a genius like Einstein, he would probably not do well on an IQ test, because he thinks outside the box," he says.
"He could probably think of a dozen answers to one question."
Either way, the time for talking may soon be over - Mensa has offered to test both Mr Trump and Mr Tillerson's IQ.

///
No cash in Budget for 'no-deal' Brexit - Philip Hammond
Taxpayers' money should not be spent on preparing for a "no-deal" Brexit yet, Chancellor Philip Hammond has said.
Writing in the Times ahead of next month's Budget, Mr Hammond said he would spend only when it was "responsible" to do so.
The chancellor said he had a responsibility to be "realistic" about the challenges of leaving the EU.
His comments came after Theresa May refused to say how she would vote if there was another EU referendum.
After the prime minister revealed this week that the government had plans for a Brexit scenario without a trade deal, Mr Hammond stressed the importance of avoiding a no-deal end to negotiations with the EU.
He said he would be "prepared for all outcomes, including a no-deal scenario" but added that the best stimulus for the economy was "certainty".
This - he wrote - could be achieved by "reaching a deal on the terms of our future long-term relationship with the European Union".
An extra £412m has already been allocated to government departments to prepare for Brexit over the next four years and Treasury sources suggested more would be made available if negotiations faltered.
However, government sources have sought to play down the significance of Mr Hammond's words, insisting he was merely reflecting Treasury caution ahead of the Budget.
The BBC's assistant political editor Norman Smith said the comments come amid mounting calls from some Tories for extra funds for new IT systems, border posts and staff - likely to be needed if there is no agreement.
On Tuesday, Mrs May - who backed Remain in last year's vote - repeatedly refused to say if she would now vote for Brexit, telling LBC radio: "I don't answer hypothetical questions."
The PM said she voted Remain "for good reasons at the time but circumstances move on" and she was focused on "delivering Brexit for the British people".
Pressed again by presenter Iain Dale, Mrs May added: "What I did last time round was I looked at everything and I came to a judgement and I would do exactly the same this time round.
"But we are not having another referendum and that's absolutely crucial."
'Thought police'
Downing Street sources suggested it was "ridiculous" to say her comments raised doubts about whether she would deliver Brexit, as some critics suggested.
Asked the same question, First Secretary of State Damian Green - who was a board member of the campaign to keep Britain in the EU - told Newsnight "it would have been" better had the country voted to remain.
Liberal Democrat deputy leader Jo Swinson said: "It is staggering that even the prime minister isn't convinced by the government's approach to Brexit."
Former UKIP leader Nigel Farage tweeted: "How can Theresa May negotiate Brexit without believing in it?"
But Labour's Wes Streeting said that although Parliament was rightly abiding by the referendum result, it was wrong to expect MPs like him who voted Remain to now say they had changed their minds.
"I see Brexit thought police are out in force today," he tweeted. "Seems those of us who voted remain are expected to say we'd vote leave now. No chance."
///
Child and teen obesity spreading across the globe
Child and teenage obesity levels have risen ten-fold in the last four decades, meaning 124m boys and girls around the globe are too fat, according to new research.
The analysis in the Lancet is the largest of its kind and looks at obesity trends in over 200 countries.
In the UK, one in every 10 young people aged five to 19, is obese.
Obese children are likely to become obese adults, putting them at risk of serious health problems, say experts.
These include type 2 diabetes, heart disease, stroke and certain types of cancer, such as breast and colon.
The Lancet analysis, released on World Obesity Day, comes as researchers from the World Obesity Federation warn that the global cost of treating ill health caused by obesity will exceed £920bn every year from 2025.
Obese the new 'norm'
Although child obesity rates appear to be stabilising in many high-income European countries, including the UK, they are accelerating at an alarming rate in many other parts of the world, lead researcher Prof Majid Ezzati from Imperial College London says.
Researchers believe wide availability and promotion of cheap, fattening food is one of the main drivers.
The largest increase in the number of obese children and adolescents has been in East Asia. China and India have seen rates "balloon" in recent years.
Polynesia and Micronesia have the highest rate of all - around half of the young population in these countries is overweight or obese.
The researchers say that if current world trends continue, 'obese' will soon be more common than 'underweight'.
The number of underweight girls and boys worldwide has been decreasing since a peak in the year 2000.
In 2016, 192m young people were underweight - still significantly more than the number of young people who were obese, but that looks set to change.
East Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean have seen a shift from underweight to obesity within the space of a few decades.
Globally, in 2016 an additional 213m young people were overweight although still below the threshold for obesity.
Co-researcher Dr Harry Rutter, from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said: "This is a huge problem that will get worse.
"Even skinny people are heavier than they would have been ten years ago.
"We have not become more weak-willed, lazy or greedy. The reality is the world around us is changing."
Dr Fiona Bull from the World Health Organization called for tough action to crack down on "calorie-dense, nutrient-poor food" and promote more physical activity.
So far, just over 20 countries around the world have introduced a tax on sugary drinks.
Dr Alison Tedstone, chief nutritionist at Public Health England, said: "Our sugar reduction programme and the government's sugar levy are world-leading, but this is just the beginning of a long journey to tackle the challenge of a generation.
"The evidence is clear, that just telling people what to do won't work. Whilst education and information are important, deeper actions are needed to help us lower calorie consumption and achieve healthier diets."
///
EE apologises for voice call issues
Mobile phone provider EE has confirmed that some customers are currently experiencing problems making voice calls.
The firm said data and messaging services were working normally.
The fault appears to largely affect calls to non-EE phone numbers.
Nearly 3,000 people have left comments on the website Down Detector from around the UK, saying they have been unable to make or receive calls, on some occasions for several hours.
"Some of our customers are reporting problems when trying to make calls to some numbers this morning," the firm said in a statement.
"All data and messaging services are working as normal. We're working to fix this as quickly as possible and apologise for any inconvenience caused."
EE also said on Twitter that emergency services numbers were still accessible.
Customers have taken to social networks and forums to complain.
"Can only call other mobiles in Nottingham, even local numbers aren't working, sort this out EE, ironically I received a text from EE promoting BT Sports app during this downtime!" wrote Pat on Down Detector.
At the end of September the firm apologised again after a fault affected customers using its UK home broadband service.
///
Trump challenges Rex Tillerson to IQ test
US President Donald Trump has challenged his Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, to an IQ test, in the latest sign of discord between the two.
He made the remark in a magazine interview when asked about reports that Mr Tillerson had called him a moron.
"I think it's fake news," Mr Trump told Forbes, "but if he did that, I guess we'll have to compare IQ tests. And I can tell you who is going to win."
Mr Trump is due to have lunch on Tuesday with Mr Tillerson.
Reports have swirled of a schism in the Trump administration between the commander-in-chief and his top diplomat, as the US faces a host of vexatious foreign policy conundrums, from North Korea to Iran.
Last week Mr Tillerson called a news conference to deny reports that he was considering quitting.
But the former ExxonMobil chief executive did not refute an NBC News report that he had called his boss a moron after a July meeting at the Pentagon.
Earlier this month, Mr Trump publicly undercut the former Texas oilman by tweeting that he was "wasting his time" trying to negotiate with nuclear-armed North Korea.
Last week the New York Times reported that Mr Tillerson was astonished at how little Mr Trump grasps the basics of foreign policy.
According to the newspaper, quoting sources close to the secretary of state, Mr Trump has been irritated by Mr Tillerson's body language during meetings.
Mr Tillerson is said to roll his eyes or slouch when he disagrees with the decisions of his boss.
A classic Trump counter-punch
Analysis by Anthony Zurcher, BBC North America reporter
Donald Trump insists that the stories about Rex Tillerson insulting his intelligence - despite being heavily sourced - are "fake news". Now, however, he's lobbing one of his trademark counter-punches, just in case.
Mr Tillerson thinks he's a moron? Well, he's smarter than Rex, that's for certain.
It's classic Trump - a slightly less juvenile version of the "I guarantee you there's no problem" retort Mr Trump snapped off during a Republican debate, when Senator Marco Rubio questioned the size of his, er, manhood.
Mr Trump tends to get touchy when people doubt his intellect. That's probably why the "moron" line has prompted such a furious response from the White House and State Department. During the campaign he said he doesn't have to consult generals because he has "a very good brain" and told a rally in South Carolina that he was highly educated and has "the best words".
In August, he boasted that he was a "better student" and went to better schools than all his elite critics.
Mr Tillerson may have opened a difficult-to-repair rift with the president. While Mr Trump is quite comfortable with insult-trading, there's one topic that's clearly off-limits.
///
James Harding: BBC's head of news to leave
BBC director of news James Harding is to stand down at the beginning of 2018.
In a statement, he said: "I am proud to have worked for BBC News as we renewed our reputation for responsible journalism."
BBC director general Tony Hall praised Harding, saying: "James has done an incredible job during a hugely complex and momentous period."
After four years in the role, Harding is leaving the BBC to set up his own news media venture.
'Distinct approach'
Announcing the move, Harding said "even when we're pedalling into the wind" that working at the BBC was "rewarding and worthwhile".
Talking about his new company, he explained: "There is some journalism that the BBC, for all its brilliance, can't, and probably shouldn't, do.
"And that's what I want to explore: I am going to start a new media company with a distinct approach to the news and a clear point of view.
"I know I will enjoy the chance to do some more journalism of my own and, at such a critical time, I'm seriously excited about the prospect of building a new venture in news."
He said he'd reveal more in the new year.
Lord Hall thanked Harding for his service to the BBC.
"James has done an incredible job during a hugely complex and momentous period of British and world history," he said.
"He has led the BBC's coverage through two referendums, two general elections, an astonishing US presidential election, not to mention a series of extraordinary events at home and abroad.
"In the years James has been with us he's played an important part in modernising and changing the BBC, but beyond that, he has been a first-class colleague and a pleasure to work with."
A successor will be appointed by the end of the year, Lord Hall said.
Harding joined the Financial Times in 1994 and served as Shanghai correspondent, media editor and Washington bureau chief.
He joined The Times in 2006 as business and city editor and was editor from 2007 to 2012.
Harding was appointed in April 2013 to oversee all of the BBC's news and current affairs programming.
The division's workforce produces output across network news, English regions and the World Service group.
Analysis by BBC media editor, Amol Rajan
In an email to staff announcing his departure, James Harding covered what all departure messages must cover: his legacy.
Harding, who is - full disclosure - my ultimate boss, mentioned the emphasis on slow news, the hiring of new talent, new language services and the launch of the Reality Check brand to address the challenge of fake news.
Together these add up to a substantial legacy. But Harding, like any journalist, will want to be remembered above all for the stories that were covered during his tenure.
///
Melania Trump hits back at Ivana 'first lady' jibe
A spokeswoman for US First Lady Melania Trump has described comments by her husband's ex-wife Ivana as "attention seeking and self-serving noise".
Ivana Trump told ABC's Good Morning America she was "basically first Trump wife, I'm first lady".
She said she had a direct line to the White House but did not want to "cause any kind of jealousy".
The first Mrs Trump is promoting her book Raising Trump, to be released on Tuesday.
She was married to Donald Trump in 1977 but they divorced in the 1990s over his affair with Marla Maples, who became his second wife.
Ivana and Donald had three children - Donald Jr, Ivanka and Eric Trump.
Ivana Trump told GMA she spoke to her former husband about once a fortnight.
"I have the direct number to White House, but I no [sic] really want to call him there because Melania is there," she said.
"I don't want to cause any kind of jealousy or something like that because I'm basically first Trump wife. I'm first lady, OK?"
Melania Trump responded with a barbed statement through her spokeswoman Stephanie Grisham.
"Mrs Trump has made the White House a home for [their son] Barron and The President," it read.
"She loves living in Washington, DC and is honoured by her role as First Lady of the United States. She plans to use her title and role to help children, not sell books.
"There is clearly no substance to this statement from an ex. Unfortunately only attention seeking and self-serving noise."
The exchange is thought to be the only public row between a US first lady and a president's former wife.
Before Mr Trump, Ronald Reagan was the only divorcee president.
///
Four ways Bob Corker skewered Donald Trump
On Sunday morning, Donald Trump went off on a Twitter tirade against a member of his own party.
This, in itself, isn't exactly huge news. It's far from the first time the president has turned his rhetorical cannons on his own ranks.
This time, however, his attacks were particularly biting and personal. He essentially called Tennessee Senator Bob Corker, the chair of the powerful Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a coward for not running for re-election.
He said Mr Corker "begged" for the president's endorsement, which he refused to give. He wrongly claimed that Mr Corker's support of the Iranian nuclear agreement was his only political accomplishment.
Unlike some of his colleagues, Mr Corker - free from having to worry about his immediate political future - didn't hold his tongue.
That wasn't the end of it, though. He then spoke with the New York Times and really let the president have it. Here are four choice quotes from the Tennessee senator's interview with the Times and why they are particularly damning.
"I don't know why the president tweets out things that are not true. You know he does it, everyone knows he does it, but he does."
You can't really sugarcoat this one. Mr Corker is flat-out saying the president is a liar - and everyone knows it.
The senator, in particular, is challenging Mr Trump's insistence that he unsuccessfully pleaded for his endorsement, but the accusation is much broader.
Mr Corker and the president used to be something akin to allies. The Tennessean was on Mr Trump's short list for vice-president and secretary of state.
Those days are seemingly very much over now - and it's not like Mr Corker is going anywhere anytime soon. Although he's not running for re-election, he'll be in the Senate, chairing a powerful committee, until January 2019.
The president's margin for success in that chamber is razor-thin. If Democrats can continue to stand together in opposition, he can afford to lose only two votes out of 52 Republican senators. That's why healthcare reform collapsed in July - and it could be bad news for tax efforts.
From here on out, Mr Corker isn't going to do the president any favours.
"Look, except for a few people, the vast majority of our caucus understands what we're dealing with here."
Frustration in Congress has been growing over what Republicans feel has been the president's inability to focus on advancing their agenda. Getting a sharply divided party to come together on plans to repeal Obamacare, reform taxes or boost infrastructure spending is challenging enough. Doing so when the president stirs up unrelated controversies on a seemingly daily basis makes things all the harder.
One of the president's gifts has been his ability to shake off negative stories by quickly moving on to a different subject. That worked brilliantly during his presidential campaign, but it's less effective during the legislative slow grind.
For months, Republicans in Congress have been grumbling about this on background and among themselves. Occasionally, someone like Mr McConnell will lament that the president doesn't understand how the Senate works.
Mr Corker has now stated it loud and clear. And, what's more, he says almost everyone agrees with him. They've kept silent until now because they still hope to pass conservative legislation that the president can sign or fear Mr Trump's legions will back a primary challenge next year or stay home during the general election.
If that calculus ever changes - if it becomes riskier to stay silent than speak out - Mr Trump will be in real trouble.
"A lot of people think that there is some kind of 'good cop, bad cop' act underway, but that's just not true."
Time and again, Mr Trump has appeared to undercut Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and others in his administration who are attempting to use soft diplomacy to deal with a range of international crises.
The war against the Taliban in Afghanistan, Iran's compliance with the multinational nuclear agreement, the ongoing dispute between Qatar and its Persian Gulf neighbours, the unrest in Venezuela and, most recently, North Korea's continued ballistic missile tests have all been the target of the president's offhand remarks and Twitter invective.
Some administration defenders have said this is all a part of Mr Trump's strategy - an updated version of the Nixon-era "madman theory", in which the president forces adversaries to give way because they fear an unpredictable US leader's actions.
Mr Corker isn't buying it. There's no strategy, he says, just the possibility of chaos - which he hopes Mr Trump's senior advisers will be able to avoid.
"I know for a fact that every single day at the White House, it's a situation of trying to contain him."
There's now a growing collection of John Kelly face-palm photos that serve as a testament to the chief-of-staff's reported frustration at dealing with the president.
Mr Trump goes off-script to praise torch-bearing white nationalists at a rally in Charlottesville, and Mr Kelly is captured closing his eyes and rubbing the arch his nose, as if attempting to stave off a migraine.
The president calls North Korean leaders "criminals" in a speech to the United Nations, and Mr Kelly straight-up buries his face in his hands.
The White House communications team is often left scrambling to try to explain or reframe an indelicate presidential "joke" or remark that directly contradicts what was until then the official administration line.
Even though Mr Kelly has brought some discipline to the West Wing staff, the president still marches to the beat of his own drum - and continues to have unfettered access to his phone's Twitter app.
Bob Corker is only the latest person - politician, journalist, sports star or celebrity - to feel the mercurial president's uncontainable ire.
///
UK must act against race inequality, Theresa May says
Theresa May is to challenge public services over how they treat people of different races.
The prime minister says institutions must "explain or change" any variations when data is released later on Tuesday.
It is expected to show unemployment for black, Asian and minority ethnic people at nearly double that of white British adults, and disparity in who owns their own home.
Critics say it is a "crude" approach that risks making a grievance culture.
The prime minister will launch a website later containing the data, compiled from across the UK government.
The government says the figures released at 12:30 BST will suggest:
Black Caribbean pupils were being permanently excluded from school three times as often as White British pupils
At key stage two, 71% of Chinese primary school pupils met the expected standard for reading, writing and maths, compared with 54% of White British pupils and 13% of White Gypsy and Roma pupils
White British pupils on free school meals performed the worst in the second stage of primary school (key stage 2) with 32% reaching the expected level
Unemployment among black, Asian and other ethnic minorities is almost double that of white British adults
Those more likely to own their own home are Indian, Pakistani and white people compared with black people and those from Bangladesh
"People who have lived with discrimination don't need a government audit to make them aware of the scale of the challenge," Mrs May will say.
"But this audit means that for society as a whole - for government, for our public services - there is nowhere to hide."
'Grievance culture' risk
But critics from ethnic minority backgrounds, including former deputy London mayor Munira Mirza, in a letter to The Times, said the "crude and tendentious" approach of comparing the data in the website risked "promoting a grievance culture and policies that harm the communities they aspire to help".
They said prejudice had declined "markedly" and while injustice must be challenged, there were often many underlying factors to explain differences.
Communities Secretary Sajid Javid denied the data would drive a grievance culture but said it would help identify disparities.
"There are hundreds of thousands of British Pakistani women and Bangladeshi women who don't speak proper English, who don't speak English at all," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
"That might be through choice in some cases, it might be a cultural issue. But that is a big issue because that does then hold those women back from the employment market and other opportunities", he said.
David Isaac, chairman of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, said the data must be used to set the foundations for change and address "entrenched inequality".
Help 'hotspots'
Although the audit will not focus on government policies, Mrs May will launch a number of measures to combat the differences discovered.
They include Department for Work and Pensions "hotspots" to help people from ethnic minorities get jobs, and traineeships for 16-24 year-olds.
///
Theresa May: 'We can prove Brexit doomsayers wrong'
Theresa May will tell parliament later that the UK can "prove the doomsayers wrong" when it comes to Brexit.
The prime minister will say "progress will not always be smooth", but add that she wants the best possible deal for both the UK and the EU.
Following her recent Florence speech in which she gave assurances on payments to the EU and citizens' rights, she will say "the ball is in their court".
Her statement comes as the fifth round of negotiations began in Brussels.
It is the final set of talks before EU leaders meet on 19 October to decide if enough progress has been made to talk about post-Brexit relations with the UK, including trade.
Downing Street said two White Papers will be published after the PM's statement, covering future trade and customs options.
In her first address to parliament since last month's speech in Italy, in which she said the UK would honour its financial obligations to the EU budget, Mrs May will describe the government's ambition for a "new, deep and special partnership between a sovereign United Kingdom and a strong and successful European Union".
"Achieving that partnership will require leadership and flexibility, not just from us but from our friends, the 27 nations of the EU," she will say.
"And as we look forward to the next stage, the ball is in their court. But I am optimistic we will receive a positive response."
Summit deadline
After a difficult week for the prime minister following her chaotic Tory conference speech and renewed questions about her leadership, the BBC's assistant political editor Norman Smith said she was determined to seize the initiative and adopt a more assertive, bullish tone about Brexit.
The talks between UK negotiators and Brussels officials will be lower profile this week, with neither David Davis or his EU counterpart Michel Barnier attending the start.
European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker has said it will take miracles for the necessary progress to have been met before the summit, whilst the European Parliament made its voice heard with a non-binding motion saying that more needed to be done.
Around Brussels there is cautious optimism that agreement can be reached on how British judges might interact with the European Court of Justice and how the deal will be implemented.
Chatter concerns whether the final arrangement on citizens' rights can be accorded a status in the UK similar to the European Communities Act, which gave EU rules supremacy over British law - a legal concept called "direct effect."
However, progress on a means of calculating the UK's financial obligations - the "Brexit Bill" - seems much less likely.
The UK will continue to challenge the demands made by EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier.
But the EU side is disappointed that specific British negotiating positions have not emerged after Theresa May's warm words in Florence a fortnight ago.
A European Commission spokesman said there was a "clear sequencing" to how talks would unfold.
"This is not exactly a ball game," Margaritis Schinas said. "There has been so far no solution found on step one, which is the divorce proceedings, so the ball is entirely in the UK court for the rest to happen."
After her speech in the House of Commons, Mrs May will meet with leading industry figures to try and reassure them about the Brexit process.
Companies including Aston Martin, HSBC, Morgan Stanley and Vodafone will attend the meeting of the Business Advisory Council in Downing street, alongside Chancellor Philip Hammond and Mr Davis.
Mr Hammond has come under fire from some Conservative MPs amid claims the Treasury is talking down the UK's prospects outside the EU.
Bernard Jenkin said the Treasury seemed intent of preserving access to EU markets "at any cost" and the prime minister needed to make clear the current pace of talks was unacceptable.
Mrs May, he told the BBC, would be "cheered to the echo if she were to say 'look, I've had enough of this, we are going to get ready to leave in 2019 but if the EU wants to come back to the table and talk to us about what kind of relationship they want with us in the long term, then we are ready to talk'."
///
Microsoft gives up on Windows 10 Mobile
Microsoft appears to have abandoned its smartphone operating system ambitions.
The company's Windows 10 chief has tweeted that developing new features and hardware for the Mobile version of the OS was no longer a "focus".
Joe Belfiore added that he had also switched to Android himself.
Windows 10 Mobile tried to attract users by letting them run the same "universal apps" on both their PCs and handsets, but the concept failed to catch on.
The OS accounted for just 0.03% of the global market - based on smartphone shipments - between April and June, according to research company IDC.
The market intelligence provider said the news had been a long time coming.
"There wasn't a wide range of devices running Windows 10 Mobile, so it wasn't attractive to retailers or operators," said IDC's Francisco Jeronimo.
"And from a consumer perspective, the operating system didn't provide as good an experience as Android or iOS."
Mr Belfiore began a series of tweets on Sunday by discussing the recent launch of a test version of Microsoft's Edge web browser for Android and iOS - the latest in a series of releases of its core software for rival mobile platforms.
He then went on to respond to questions about whether there was any point sticking with Windows 10 Mobile.
He said that while Microsoft would support the "many companies" that had adopted the platform, he had switched to Android for the diversity of its apps and hardware.
"Of course we'll continue to support the platform... bug fixes, security updates, et cetera," he said.
"But building new features or hardware is not the focus."
Mr Belfiore posted Microsoft had tried "very hard" to incentivise other companies to release universal apps - even writing their software for them in some cases - but the number of users had been too low for most to bother.
The announcement comes a week after HP had said it no longer planned to release further Windows 10 Mobile handsets, and a fortnight after Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates disclosed that he had already made the switch to Android.
However, some manufacturers - including the UK's Wileyfox and Germany's TrekStor - had unveiled new models powered by Windows 10 Mobile as recently as last month.
"Most Microsoft applications are now available and supported on other mobile operating systems," said Mr Jeronimo.
"After Satya Nadella took over as chief executive, that clearly became the strategy - and after that happened what incentive was there to buy a Windows-powered phone?"
However, Microsoft may not have given up on powering smartphones altogether.
Earlier this year, Windows Central reported the company was working on a new version of Windows 10 - codenamed Andromeda - that would run on all types of computer and make it possible for third-party apps to adapt without having to code a special "universal" version.
It said the OS was due for release next year, but suggested the code would not be offered as an upgrade to existing Windows 10 Mobile devices.
A spokeswoman for Microsoft was unable to provide further comment.
///
Theresa May got a standing ovation from Tory activists after struggling through a conference speech in which she vowed to "renew the British dream".
The PM battled a sore throat - at one point being handed a lozenge by the chancellor.
She was also interrupted by a comedian, who handed her a P45, saying "Boris asked me to give you this," before being ejected from the hall.
She announced more council houses and a cap on energy prices.
She delivered a call for a "modern, compassionate Britain" in a speech that focused on her personal commitment to social justice and fairness.
She said the "British dream" that "life should be better for the next generation" was out of reach for too many people, something she vowed to dedicate her premiership to fixing.
She also apologised to activists in Manchester for an election campaign that had been "too scripted, too presidential".
She was interrupted early on by comedian Simon Brodkin - also known as Lee Nelson - who managed to make it to the podium to hand her a P45, a redundancy notice, which he said was from the foreign secretary.
After he was removed and she got encouraging cheers from the audience she joked that the only P45 she wanted to give out was to Jeremy Corbyn.
But she struggled to finish the speech because of a croaky voice, having to stop several times to drink water.
To add to her woes, some of the letters fell off the conference stage backdrop. By the end it read: "Building a country that works or everyon."
Sources close to the prime minister have said that the PM had caught the "conference cold", and that her many interviews and meetings this week have taken their toll on her voice.
They say the prankster who interrupted her speech has been arrested for a breach of the peace and there will be a thorough investigation of security.
Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson said of the prime minister's performance: "If ever there was a metaphor for battling through adversity, that was it."
Who is Simon Brodkin aka Lee Nelson?
Simon Brodkin is an English comedian more commonly known by his TV character name Lee Nelson. Handing the prime minister a P45 was far from his first.
His most famous interruption came at Glastonbury in 2015 when he ran onstage as Kanye West was performing. He pulled a similar stunt on The X Factor in 2014, running onstage as the Stereo Kicks were playing.
He also threw US dollar bills over former Fifa president Sepp Blatter during the football organisation's bidding scandal.
Mrs May began her speech by outlining the reasons why she joined the Conservative Party more than 40 years ago, stressing that the things that have made her most proud in politics have not been the positions she has held, but "knowing that I made a difference - helped those who cannot be heard".
She announced that there would be an independent review of the Mental Health Act, to tackle injustice, and would press for justice to be done for the families of those killed and injured in the Grenfell Tower tragedy.
"That's what I'm in this for," she said.
Turning to Brexit, Mrs May said she was "confident that we will find a deal that works for Britain and Europe". She also reassured European citizens living in the UK that "you are welcome here" and urged negotiators to reach agreement on this policy "because we want you to stay".
Mrs May said it had "always been a great sadness for Philip and me that we were never blessed with children", but she said this did not stop her wanting to help young people on to the housing ladder.
Hailing plans to "reignite home ownership" in Britain, she said the government plans to invest an additional £2bn in affordable housing, taking the total budget up to almost £9bn.
If ministers made the land available and gave young people the skills to build the houses, she challenged house builders to ensure they "build the homes our country needs".
The BBC's assistant political editor Norman Smith said the focus on council housing underlines Mrs May's readiness to intervene and use the public sector to build houses in a way not seen since the 1950s.
Mrs May announced that the government will next week publish draft legislation to impose a cap on energy prices.
Downing Street says it will apply to all standard variable rates.
Having seen her Commons majority vanish after June's general election and facing calls to sack Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson over his interventions on Brexit, Mrs May attempted to use the conference to unite the party behind her "mission" to transform Britain.
She called on the party to "dig deep within ourselves" and go forward together.
She said it would not be easy, but "it has never been my style to hide from a challenge, to shrink from a task, to retreat in the face of difficulty, to give up and turn away.
"And it is when tested the most that we reach deep within ourselves and find that our capacity to rise to the challenge before us may well be limitless.
"That is the story of our party. That is the story of our country. And that is the resolve and determination we need as we turn to face the future today."
Urging her party to focus on the needs of working people, she said it should be "not addressing our concerns, but the issues, the problems, the challenges, that concern them", and "not focusing on our future, but on the future of their children and their grandchildren - doing everything we can to ensure their tomorrow will be better than our today".
///
Theresa May: I don't want a cabinet of 'yes' men
Theresa May has brushed off questions about Boris Johnson's recent Brexit comments - saying she does not want to be surrounded by "yes" men.
The prime minister told BBC Breakfast "leadership is about ensuring you have a team... of different voices around the table so you can discuss matters".
Mrs May was speaking ahead of a day in which the foreign secretary is due to deliver his key conference speech.
It comes after Mr Johnson set out his Brexit "red lines" at the weekend.
Mrs May has been shown the foreign secretary's speech and is understood to be happy with it, the BBC's assistant political editor Norman Smith.
Sources say the speech is 100% loyal to the prime minister and the Brexit agenda set out in her Florence speech last month, Norman Smith added.
Asked whether there were any red lines which Mr Johnson himself should not cross, Mrs May told Breakfast: "I don't set red lines. Everybody uses this phrase 'red lines'. I don't set those sort of red lines.
"All I would say is actually I think leadership is about ensuring you have a team of people who aren't yes men, but a team of people of different voices around the table, so you can discuss matters, come to an agreement and then put that government view forward, and that's exactly what we've done."
'Changing the dial'
Speaking later on BBC Radio 4's Today, Mrs May said the foreign secretary and the rest of the cabinet were united behind her Brexit strategy, insisting that European leaders knew what the UK wanted and that her Florence speech had "changed the dial".
"What I am very clear about is of course the prime minister is in charge," she said.
Mrs May said the foreign secretary would be talking about his vision for a "global Britain" after Brexit in his speech later and she supported that.
On Europe, she said she backed an implementation period of about two years after the UK leaves in March 2019 but suggested that some changes could come into effect earlier if appropriate.
On her own future, she said was committed to delivering the "mission of government", insisting that there was "a long term job to be done here".
She acknowledged that her message "did not come across in the general election" as she would have wanted and it was apparent the concerns of the British people were "more keenly felt" than people had thought.
Mrs May said the election had shown that many people felt "left behind and ignored" but she insisted that change would not happen overnight and no "great phrase" would transform things.
"I am very clear about the problems in society but I am very clear as a politician and particularly as prime minister, we owe it to people to show how we can deliver and resolve those politicians.
"There is no simple idea that is going to change all of these. It will take action in a number of areas."
///
Flu vaccine: NHS patients wanted to test 'universal' jab
Researchers are seeking about 500 NHS patients to try out a new "universal" vaccine against seasonal flu.
The experimental vaccine works differently from the one currently available, which has to be remade each year based on a "best guess" of what type of flu is likely to be about.
The new jab targets part of the virus that does not change each year.
This means the vaccine should work against human, bird and swine flu, say the team at University of Oxford.
It will offer people better protection, they believe.
Extra protection
Immunisation is the best defence we have against flu but it is not always effective.
Last winter's vaccine cut the risk of flu in adults under the age of 65 by about 40%, but barely worked in people over 65, despite being a good match for the type of flu in circulation.
As people age, their immune systems are often weaker and their bodies may not respond as well to a vaccine as younger people's bodies.
Prof Sarah Gilbert and colleagues believe that using their vaccine alongside the current one could help.
It is the world's first widespread human testing of such a vaccine, according to the National Institute for Health Research, which is supporting the project.
Patients aged 65 or older and living in Berkshire and Oxfordshire will be invited to take part in the trial.
Half of the 500 volunteers will receive the usual seasonal flu jab and a placebo or dummy jab, while the other half with get the regular vaccine plus the new experimental one.
The new vaccine uses a novel way to get the body to ward off flu.
Flu viruses look a bit like a ball covered in pins. Current flu jabs work by getting the body's immune system to recognise and attack the pin heads or surface proteins of the virus.
But these surface proteins can change, meaning the vaccine must change too.
The experimental vaccine instead encourages the body to make other immune system weapons, called T cells, against unchanging core proteins housed within the "ball" part of the virus.
It should fight multiple strains of influenza and will not need to be redesigned each year, unlike the current one used by the NHS.
Bad flu season
Prof Gilbert, co-founder of Vaccitech, a spin-out company from University of Oxford's Jenner Institute that is part-funding the work, told the BBC: "We expect that the protection from the new vaccine will last longer than a year, but we will need to test that with more clinical trials in the future.
"It is possible that, in future, vaccinations against flu might be given at longer intervals - maybe every five years instead of every year. But first we have to test protection in the first flu season following vaccination."
She said the current trial will take two years to complete. If further studies go well the vaccine could then be licensed for wider use.
The NHS is braced for a bad flu season this winter, following the worst outbreak in many years in Australia and New Zealand.
Flu is easily transmitted and even people with mild or no symptoms can infect others.
///
Catalan referendum: Regional strike threatened after vote
A general strike threatens to bring large areas of Catalonia to a standstill, following the Spanish region's disputed referendum.
The strike was called by Catalan trade unions and associations due to "the grave violation of rights and freedoms" seen during Sunday's ballot.
Madrid had deemed the referendum illegal. However, more than 2.2m people reportedly voted in spite of this.
But hundreds were hurt as Spanish police tried to stop it going ahead.
Some of the officers ordered to prevent people casting their vote were seen firing rubber bullets, storming into polling stations and pulling women by their hair.
Thirty-three police officers were injured on Sunday, Catalan medical officials said.
Tuesday's strike, a reaction to the violence, will see public transport, schools and clinics in Catalonia closed for the day.
Barcelona's famous football team is also expected to go on strike, although it is not due to play a match, as are the city's public universities and contemporary art museum.
Catalan rage: Separatism or populism?
By Europe Editor Katya Adler
It would be wrong to interpret the anger and anguish so palpable in Catalonia right now as an expression of political unity. Catalans are as divided as ever on the question of independence.
What unites them today is a seething fury and resentment at the heavy-handedness of the Spanish government, represented by Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, with what Catalans perceive as his Madrid-centric arrogance, brutishness and disregard for the rights of individuals.
This is far less about separatism than populism. Anti-establishment, nationalist sentiment a la Catalana.
Meanwhile, political leaders are trying to find a way forward.
Catalan President Carles Puigdemont has said he wants a new understanding with the central government in Madrid, but the government, led by Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, has warned it could suspend autonomy of the wealthy north-eastern region.
However, while Catalan officials say almost 90% of voters backed independence, turn out was relatively low at a reported 42%, potentially weakening Mr Puigdemont's position.
What's more, given the chaotic nature of the vote, the turnout and voting figures should be taken with a pinch of salt, says the BBC's Tom Burridge in Barcelona.
Mr Rajoy has said the vote made a "mockery" of democracy, saying that Catalans had been fooled into taking part in the illegal vote.
The prime minister held talks with Pedro Sánchez, the leader of the main opposition Socialist party, as well as Albert Rivera, the head of the centrist Ciudadanos party, late on Monday.
While the socialist leader urged Mr Rajoy to hold talks with the Catalan president immediately, Mr Rivera said Spain should invoke article 155 of the constitution, in effect suspending Catalonia's autonomous powers.
Mr Puigdemont has called on the international community to help mediate between the two sides.
However, the European Commission described the crisis as "an internal matter" for Spain, that has to be dealt with in line with the constitutional order.
///
US musician Tom Petty dies aged 66
US musician Tom Petty has died in California aged 66, says a statement issued on behalf of his family.
Petty was found unconscious, not breathing and in full cardiac arrest at his Malibu home early on Monday.
He was taken to hospital, but could not be revived and died later that evening.
Petty was best known as the lead singer of Tom Petty and The Heartbreakers, and his hits included American Girl, Breakdown, Free Fallin', Learning to Fly and Refugee.
Obituary: A quiet, unassuming legend
"He died peacefully at 20:40 Pacific time (03:40 GMT Tuesday) surrounded by family, his bandmates and friends," said his long-time manager Tony Dimitriades.
A statement on the singer's Twitter page described Petty's passing as an "untimely death".
Petty was also a co-founder of the Traveling Wilburys group in the late 1980s, touring with Bob Dylan, Roy Orbison, Jeff Lynne and George Harrison.
"It's shocking, crushing news," Dylan told the Los Angeles Times.
"I thought the world of Tom. He was a great performer, full of the light, a friend, and I'll never forget him."
Other tributes include those from fellow musicians Sir Paul McCartney, Carole King, Brian Wilson and Cyndi Lauper.
McCartney tweeted that he was "sending his love" to Petty and his family, while King said her "heart goes out" to "family, friends and fans of Tom Petty, of which I'm one".
Beach Boys star Brian Wilson tweeted that he was "heartbroken" to hear of the news.
Canadian singer Bryan Adams thanked Petty "for all the great rockin' music".
Actor Kiefer Sutherland also paid tribute.
He tweeted: "Today America lost one of its musical giants. Thank you Tom Petty for all the music. To me you will live forever."
Petty also found solo success in 1989 with his album Full Moon Fever, which featured one of his most popular songs, Free Fallin', co-written with Jeff Lynne.
In 2002, Petty was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
Petty was born in Gainesville, Florida, on 20 October, 1950.
He endured a rough childhood, living in poverty with an alcoholic, abusive father - but his life changed in 1961 when he met Elvis Presley and shook his hand.
"That was the end of doing anything other than music with my life," he said.
He joined two bands at school, The Sundowners and The Epics, before dropping out to play with Mudcrutch, aged 17.
After that band broke up, Petty and several of its members formed Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, releasing their debut album in 1976.
Their career was slow to take off, but heavy touring - including a well-received support slot with future E Street Band member Nils Lofgren in the UK - eventually pushed them into the chart.
Over the next four decades, they became one of rock's most reliable live acts, doggedly sticking to their no-frills rock template, and producing a stream of radio staples including Don't Come Around Here No More and the Stevie Nicks duet Stop Draggin' My Heart Around.
Petty scored solo hits with the platinum-selling albums Full Moon Fever and Wildflower, while the 1991 album Into The Wild gave the band a number one single, Learning To Fly.
The video for the title track was also in constant rotation on MTV, thanks in no small part to cameos by Johnny Depp, Faye Dunaway and a then-unknown Matt LeBlanc.
Petty gave his last live shows just a week ago, playing three sold-out dates at the Hollywood Bowl as part of a 40th anniversary tour.
Last December, he told Rolling Stone magazine: "I'd be lying if I didn't say I was thinking this might be the last big one. We're all on the backside of our 60s.
"I have a granddaughter now I'd like to see as much as I can. I don't want to spend my life on the road."
///
How Trump turned against gun control
When attempting to interpret Donald Trump's statements on firearm regulation, and how they could shape a presidential policy response to the Las Vegas mass shooting, the key is to note when he said them.
As with many of his political opinions, Mr Trump's views on gun control have shifted to the right over the years.
In the 1990s and early 2000s, Mr Trump expressed support for a ban on so-called assault weapons - long rifles with military-style features to more easily fire multiple rounds.
"I generally oppose gun control, but I support the ban on assault weapons and I support a slightly longer waiting period to purchase a gun," he wrote in his 2000 book, The America We Deserve.
In 2012 Mr Trump praised Democrat Barack Obama's call for more firearm regulation after the shooting at a Newtown, Connecticut, school that claimed 26 lives, including 20 children.
Conservative bona fides
As Mr Trump began more seriously contemplating a bid for the Republican presidential nomination, however, his views on gun control changed. By the time he announced his entry into the race in 2015, he was well within the mainstream of the Republican Party, which viewed most forms of additional gun regulation as a violation of Second Amendment constitutional protections.
It was Mr Trump's way of establishing his conservative cultural bona fides - proving that he wasn't the big-city liberal he had at times seemed.
In an October 2015 Republican debate, for instance, he boasted that he carried handguns "a lot" and said government-mandated gun-free zones in places like schools, churches and military bases were a "catastrophe" and made for "target practice for the sickos".
Mr Trump would frequently say the answer to mass shootings was having more citizens with firearms - contending that the death toll in the Paris and San Bernardino attacks would have been much lower if bullets had been going "both ways" - towards the victims and the assailants.
The NRA's man
To the surprise of many, Mr Trump secured the endorsement of the National Rifle Association in May 2016, at a time when some Republicans were still uncomfortable with the New Yorker as their presumptive nominee.
"Now is the time to unite," NRA Executive Director Chris Cox said at the time. "If your preferred candidate got out of the race, it's time to get over it."
From then on Mr Trump - in his statements and on his campaign website - largely echoed the NRA's hard line on firearm issues. The group would end up spending more than $30m (£22m) to support Mr Trump's presidential bid.
During the general election, Mr Trump attacked Democrat Hillary Clinton as being in favour of stringent gun control and pledged that he was the candidate that would protect the rights of the estimated 55 million Americans who currently own firearms.
There was one moment during last year's campaign, however, when Mr Trump did break with the NRA's line. After the Orlando nightclub shooting in June, he appeared to endorse limiting gun purchase for national security purposes.
"I will be meeting with the NRA, who has endorsed me, about not allowing people on the terrorist watch list, or the no fly list, to buy guns," he tweeted.
Nothing came of that meeting, however, and as president Mr Trump appears to have made little effort to follow through on it.
'If crooked Hillary got elected...'
Mr Trump's only significant action on guns as president has been to sign a law rolling-back Obama-era limitations on the ability of those being treated for mental illness to purchase firearms.
During a recent campaign rally in Alabama, Mr Trump even revisited his old attacks against Mrs Clinton, warning "you'd be handing in your rifles" if she had been elected.
Congress is currently considering legislation that would make it easier for Americans to purchase silencers for their weapons - a proposal Mrs Clinton criticised in a tweet after the Las Vegas attack.
The president, so far, has not commented publicly on the legislation, which was expected to be approved by the House of Representatives but has little chance of passage in the Senate.
If the legislation becomes the centre of post-Las Vegas political controversy, however, it may be difficult for the White House to stay above the fray.
A time to heal
In the meantime, Mr Trump now has the unenviable task of trying to heal the nation after yet another "deadliest mass shooting in modern US history" and explaining what - if anything - he proposes to do to stop future tragedies.
George W Bush's turn came in April 2007, as a shocked nation mourned 32 dead on a Virginia college campus.
Barack Obama had his moment in June 2016, following the Orlando Pulse nightclub attack that left 49 dead.
"This massacre is … a further reminder of how easy it is for someone to get their hands on a weapon that lets them shoot people in a school, or in a house of worship, or a movie theatre, or in a nightclub," he said after Orlando.
"And we have to decide if that's the kind of country we want to be. And to actively do nothing is a decision as well."
No easy answers?
The story of Mr Trump's response is still unfolding. The number of dead has risen to 58, with the estimated number of wounded an astounding, incomprehensible 500.
After tweeting out his "warmest sympathies" to the victims of the Las Vegas shooting on Monday morning, Mr Trump took to the lectern at the White House to deliver a statement heavy on prayers, mourning and calls for unity but light on hints of what comes next.
During his morning remarks the president said that, in the search for "meaning in the chaos", answers do not come easy.
In coming days and weeks ahead, many answers for how to respond to the bloodshed in Las Vegas will be offered. They're already pouring in from the president's friends and critics.
Many will be policies - often contradictory - that Mr Trump, at one time or another, has supported.
///
The computers being trained to beat you in an argument
Humans are used to being outdone by computers when it comes to recalling facts, but they still have the upper hand in an argument. For now.
It has long been the case that machines can beat us in games of strategy like chess.
And we have come to accept that artificial intelligence is best at analysing huge amounts of data - sifting through the supermarket receipts of millions of shoppers to work out who might be tempted by some vouchers for washing powder.
But what if AI were able to handle the most human of tasks - navigating the minefield of subtle nuance, rhetoric and even emotions to take us on in an argument?
It is a possibility that could help humans make better decisions and one which growing numbers of researchers are working on.
Argument spotting
Until very recently, the creation of machines that can argue was an unattainable goal.
The aim is not, of course, to teach computers how to up the pressure in a feisty exchange over a parking space, or to resolve whose turn it is to take out the bins.
Instead, machines that can argue would inform debate - helping humans challenge the evidence, look at alternatives and robustly draw conclusions.
It is a possibility which could advance decision making on everything from how a business should invest its money, to tackling crime and improving public health.
But teaching a computer how people communicate - and what an argument actually is - is extraordinarily complex.
Think about a courtroom as an example of where arguments are central.
Giving evidence is certainly a part of the process, but social rules, legal requirements, emotional sensitivities, and practical constraints all influence how advocates, jury members and judges formulate and express their reasoning.
Over the past couple of years, however, researchers have started to think that it might be possible to model some aspects of human arguments.
Work is now under way to capture how such exchanges work and turn them into AI algorithms.
This is a field known as argument technology.
The advances have been made possible by a rapid increase in the amount of data available to train computers in the art of debate.
Some of the data is coming from domains like intelligence analysis; some from specialised online sources and some from broadcasts such as the BBC's Moral Maze.
New methods to teach computers how arguments work have also been developed.
Researchers in the area draw on philosophy, linguistics, computer science and even law and politics in order to get a handle on how debates fit together.
At the University of Dundee we have recently even been using 2,000-year-old theories of rhetoric as a way of spotting the structures of real-life arguments.
The rapid advances in the field have led to dozens of research labs around the world applying themselves to the problem, and the explosion in this area of research is like nothing else I have witnessed in 20 years in academia.
'Why is the sky blue?'
Does this mean that computers will soon be fluent orators on the verge of taking over the world?
No. Let me give you a mundane example.
Until very recently even the most sophisticated AI techniques would have been completely flummoxed by pronouns.
So if you say to your smartphone's personal assistant: "I like Amy Winehouse. Play something by her," the software would be unable to work out that by "her" you mean "Amy Winehouse". Hardly the stuff of robot-apocalypse nightmares.
If such simple things can be too difficult for AI, what chance is there that computers could argue?
Narrowing our focus down, there are at least two ways in which computers could argue that are tantalisingly close.
The first is in justifying and explaining.
It's one thing to look up online how video game violence affects children, but it's quite another to have a system automatically harvest reasons for and against censorship of such violence - an area being explored by IBM, with whom we collaborate.
The system that results is like an assistant, making sense of the conflicting views around and allowing us to dig into the justifications for different standpoints.
The second is to develop artificial intelligence that can play dialogue games - following the rules of interaction that can be found everywhere from courtrooms to auction houses.
These games have been a mainstay of philosophical investigation from Plato to Wittgenstein, but they are starting to be used to help computers contribute to discussions between humans.
Anyone who's met a toddler will be familiar with one of these games.
The rules are very simple. The adult says something. The toddler asks, "Why?" The adult answers. The toddler asks, "Why?" again. And repeat.
Usually these conversations end when the adult makes a desperate attempt to change the subject.
But most of us who've played this game in the role of the adult will know that, actually, after a couple of moves, it can become rather difficult to give good answers: we have to think pretty hard.
Thinking pretty hard - while not terribly important if trying to explain to a three-year-old why the sky is blue - becomes much more important if the discussion is about a business decision affecting hundreds of jobs, or intelligence on whether a group poses a terrorist threat.
So if even the simplest possible dialogue game might be able to improve thinking around important decisions, what about more sophisticated models?
That's what we're working on.
If computers can learn the techniques to identify the types of argument humans are using to make group decisions, they can also assess the evidence used and put forward suggestions, or even possible answers.
Helping a team to avoid unconscious biases, weak evidence and poorly thought-through arguments can improve the quality of debate.
So, for example, we are building software that recognises when people use arguments based on witness testimony, and can then critique them, pointing out the ways in which witnesses may be biased or unreliable.
From corporate boardrooms, to couples' mediation and from intelligence analysis to interior design, AI could soon be helping to nudge us towards better decisions.
The term "artificial intelligence" was first used in the late 1950s and leading researchers at the time confidently predicted that full AI was about 20 years away.
It still is - and probably much farther away than that.
In the meantime, argument technology offers the potential to contribute to the decisions made by humans.
This type of artificial intelligence would not usurp human team members, but work with them as partners to tackle difficult challenges.
And it might even offer help explaining to three-year-olds why the sky is blue.
///
'No point trying to be cool' - the Tories seeking young voters
The Conservatives have a problem. More young people are voting than at any time in the last quarter of a century, but largely not for them - so what can the party do to change that?
It's been labelled - perhaps unfairly - the "Tory Glastonbury". Around 200 activists, MPs, sympathetic thinkers and business people meet in the low September sunshine to discuss how the party can attract young voters.
Just two years ago, the split in support between Labour and the Conservatives among 18 to 29-year-olds was fairly even, 36% to 32%.
Fast forward to this June's general election and that small gap had become a chasm - according to pollsters YouGov - with Labour now on 64% to the Tories' 21%.
In fact, unless you were touching 50, you were in a minority if you voted Conservative.
'Panic mode'
Addressing worried-looking party figures at the Big Tent Ideas festival in Berkshire, Lord Cooper - one-time director of strategy for ex-Prime Minister David Cameron - puts it starkly.
Older Conservative voters, he says, are dying. And younger, more "open" voters are not going to decide when they hit 50 that "feminism and the internet and the green movement are a bad thing after all".
Unless the party responds, he adds, "it is going to die".
So what should they do?
"Somebody famous and clever said the Conservative Party only knows two modes - complacency or panic," says one of the Tories' youngest MPs. "And we're definitely in panic mode."
Bim Afolami, an old Etonian and former banker, is 31 and has only been an MP for a few months, but his thoughts have already turned to this question.
"The party generally, collectively, realises that this is a problem," he says.
With the Budget less than two months away, he says Chancellor Philip Hammond recently told a meeting of Conservative backbenchers that the party must address two of the key issues for younger voters - housing and student debt.
Victoria Borwick - who represented the safe seat of Kensington until she became one of the 33 Conservative MPs swept away by Labour's better-than-expected showing in June - echoes the message.
"Every single MP should go back to their own area and see how they can build more housing for the next generation."
'Not Glastonbury'
It might be only 100 miles away, but the Big Tent Ideas Festival couldn't be further from Glastonbury.
The music is Bach - perfectly rendered by a violinist. The buffet is delicate and refined. And there are more MPs in attendance than the young voters whom the ideas are intended to reach.
"This is not Glastonbury," Mr Afolami points out. "It's more akin to (literature festival) Hay-on-Wye."
The comparison is clearly unfair, but does it matter?
The story goes that the brains behind the event, Conservative MP George Freeman, saw Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn cheered by thousands at Glastonbury over the summer and asked, "Why is it just the left who have all the fun in politics?"
Conservative MP James Cleverly is unimpressed.
"Wow, a left-wing leader getting a good reception at a rock festival," he says, ironically.
"What kind of crazy world is it we live in that that kind of thing happens?
"It's a bunch of young people who've just been given a massive electoral bribe."
Mr Corbyn - who said before the election he would "deal" with student debt - will be punished for taking "younger voters for fools", Cleverly says.
"Being hip, being popular, being cool, that's really easy," says Cleverly.
"Until you have to make tough decisions. And when you have to make tough decisions, that veneer of coolness comes off real quick.
"So the better thing to do is to be right and be doing the right things for the right reasons rather than trying to be cool and popular and saying whatever thing is going to get good headlines or a big cheer at Glastonbury."
Diversity
What, then, can the party learn?
Labour's general election campaign was praised for its use of social media and for reaching young people previously unmoved by party politics.
Tobi Alabi - a south Londoner who was invited to attend the ideas festival, and was courted by Conservatives there, but isn't a supporter - says the party was an irrelevance for most of his friends.
Labour, he says, related and appealed to young people.
"That's something the Conservative Party didn't do. They didn't display diversity. They didn't display an appeal to young people. You have to tap into young people's interests."
So - if they do that - could those young people won over by Jeremy Corbyn's Labour one day support the Tories?
"Those people can be won back," says a hopeful Bim Afolami.
"Those are not people who have decided forever to vote for one person or one party.
"I think if we show them that we've got the right policies - but, more importantly, the right values - those are people that we can at least compete for in the future."
///
Universal Credit: Advance payments offered as rollout continues - BBC News, October 2017
Benefit claimants struggling to pay their bills will be able to get cash advances upfront, Work and Pensions Secretary David Gauke has said.
He said he recognised concerns that people moving on to Universal Credit had to wait six weeks to be paid.
He told the Conservative conference those needing a cash advance would get one within five days - or on the same day in emergency cases.
But he said he was committed to the system and its rollout would go ahead.
A dozen or so Conservative MPs have called for the rollout of universal credit, which merges six existing benefits into one, to be put on hold because of the financial difficulties facing people arising from the transition from weekly or fortnightly to monthly payments.
Official figures show 24% of new Universal Credit claimants wait longer than six weeks to be paid in full - causing many to fall behind on rent.
The government has insisted the vast majority of claimants were paid in full and on time, and are comfortable managing their money.
Mr Gauke told party conference in Manchester that the shake-up of the benefit system was "working", giving people more incentives to seek employment and helping people in work secure better-paid jobs.
He insisted that its rollout to more JobCentres across the UK would continue on the present timetable, with the aim of it being fully implemented by 2022.
But he said the rollout would not be "rushed" and he had listened to concerns about how some new claimants were finding it hard to make ends meet.
'Proactive help'
"I am determined to ensure that those who need support earlier in the month will get it," he said.
"I can announce today that we are refreshing the guidance to DWP staff to ensure that anyone who needs an advance payment will be offered it up-front.
"Claimants who want an advance payment will not have to wait six weeks. They will receive this advance within five working days. And if someone is in immediate need, then we fast track the payment, meaning they will receive it on the same day."
He added: "As Conservatives we do not believe, we have never believed, that we can turn our backs on those most in need. As Conservatives we believe in a strong and compassionate welfare state that helps everyone fulfil their potential."
Speaking earlier on Monday, Chancellor Philip Hammond defended the design of the new system but conceded that some recipients were facing challenges in terms of their cash flow.
Ministers were instructing JobCentre staff to point people proactively to available loan arrangements, he said.
///
Catalan referendum: Catalonia has 'won right to statehood' - BBC News, October 2017
Catalan leader Carles Puigdemont says the Spanish region has won the right to statehood following a contentious referendum that was marred by violence.
He said the door was open to a unilateral declaration of independence after Catalan officials said voters had backed secession with a 42.3% turnout.
Spain's government has warned it could suspend Catalan autonomy.
The constitutional court banned the vote and almost 900 people were hurt as police tried to stop it going ahead.
Officers from the national police and paramilitary Civil Guard seized ballot papers and boxes at polling stations.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy said Catalans had been fooled into taking part in an illegal vote.
More than 2.2 million people were reported to have voted, according to Catalan authorities, out of 5.3 million registered voters. Just under 90% of those who voted backed independence, they said.
A Catalan spokesman said more than 750,000 votes could not be counted because polling stations were closed and urns were confiscated.
What have Catalan and Spanish leaders said?
"With this day of hope and suffering, the citizens of Catalonia have won the right to an independent state in the form of a republic," Mr Puigdemont said in a televised address.
"My government in the next few days will send the results of today's vote to the Catalan parliament, where the sovereignty of our people lies, so that it can act in accordance with the law of the referendum."
He said the European Union could no longer "continue to look the other way".
The Spanish prime minister spoke of a "mockery" of democracy.
"At this hour I can tell you in the strongest terms what you already know and what we have seen throughout this day. There has not been a referendum on self-determination in Catalonia," Mr Rajoy said.
Spain's justice minister warned that any declaration of independence could lead to article 155 of the country's constitution being invoked which allows the national government to intervene in the running of an autonomous region.
"We are not here to divide Spaniards... but if someone tries to declare independence on behalf of a part of Spain's territory, that cannot be done because it is beyond their powers," said Rafael Catalá.
More than 40 trade unions and Catalan associations called a region-wide strike on Tuesday due to "the grave violation of rights and freedoms".
How bad was the violence?
TV images showed Spanish police kicking would-be voters and pulling women out of polling stations by their hair.
Catalan medical officials said 844 people had been hurt in clashes, including 33 police. The majority had minor injuries or had suffered from anxiety attacks.
In Girona, riot police smashed their way into a polling station where Mr Puigdemont was due to vote, and forcibly removed those inside. He voted at another station.
The BBC's Tom Burridge in Barcelona witnessed police being chased away from one polling booth after they had raided it.
TV footage showed riot police using batons to beat a group of firefighters who were protecting crowds in Girona.
The national police and Guardia Civil - a military force charged with police duties - were sent into Catalonia in large numbers to prevent the vote.
The Catalan police - the Mossos d'Esquadra - have been placed under Madrid's control, however witnesses said they showed little inclination to use force on protesters.
Barcelona Mayor Ada Colau, who voted blank on Sunday, condemned police actions against the region's "defenceless" population, but Spain's Deputy Prime Minister Soraya Saenz de Santamaria said police had "acted with professionalism and in a proportionate way".
Large crowds of independence supporters gathered in the centre of the regional capital Barcelona on Sunday evening, waving flags and singing the Catalan anthem. Anti-independence protesters have also held rallies in Barcelona and other Spanish cities.
How much voting took place?
Catalan authorities said 319 of about 2,300 polling stations across the region had been closed by police while the Spanish government said 92 stations had been sealed off.
Since Friday, thousands of people have occupied schools and other buildings designated as polling stations in order to keep them open.
Many of those inside were parents and their children, who remained in the buildings after the end of lessons on Friday and bedded down in sleeping bags on gym mats.
The anti-independence Societat Civil said there were voting irregularities, including the same people voting twice.
Catalonia, a wealthy region of 7.5 million people in north-eastern Spain, has its own language and culture.
It also has a high degree of autonomy, but is not recognised as a separate nation under the Spanish constitution.
What happens next?
Analysis: Tom Burridge, BBC News, Barcelona
Spain's complicated relationship with the region of Catalonia is headed for the unknown.
After violence by Spanish police, a declaration of independence by Catalonia's regional government seems more likely than ever before.
Given the chaotic nature of the vote, turnout and voting figures should be taken with a pinch of salt. On Monday the government in Madrid will hold talks with Spanish parties to discuss a response to the biggest political crisis this country has seen in decades.
///
Theresa May urged to halt Universal Credit rollout - September 2017
Families could be left homeless and destitute if Theresa May insists on pressing ahead with Universal Credit, a former top adviser has warned.
Dame Louise Casey urged the prime minister to delay the rollout of the new benefit system so it can be fixed.
A dozen Tory MPs are calling for it to be paused, the Daily Telegraph says.
Official figures show 24% of new Universal Credit claimants wait longer than six weeks to be paid in full - causing many to fall behind on rent.
That could make a big difference to families who were "close to the edge," Dame Louise told the BBC. They "will end up in dire circumstances, more dire than I think we have seen in this country for years".
The government says the new system, which merges six existing benefits into one, offers extra support and that budgeting and financial help is available.
Work and Pensions Secretary Mr Gauke is expected to make a decision in the coming days about whether the rollout should be accelerated.
'Work should pay'
But Dame Louise, who has advised four prime ministers on social policy over the past 18 years, including Mrs May, said the implementation had to be got right.
"I completely agree that we all should be wedded to the principle, and therefore the overall policy, that work should pay," she said.
But she added: "If it means that we are looking at more and more people that are ending up homeless, or ending up having their kids taken away, or ending up in more dire circumstances, that cannot be the intention.
"It can't be and it won't be the intention of Theresa May or First Secretary of State Damian Green or any of those people. I just don't believe that they would want that to happen."
She suggested ministers were blindly "pressing on" with the policy because they did not want to be accused of doing a U-turn. But she said: "It's like jumping over a cliff - once you have jumped, people end up at the bottom and we don't want that to happen."
Homeless 'because of Universal Credit'
Garry Dunningham, 24, lives in a tent by the river in Great Yarmouth.
He says he and his girlfriend were evicted from their shared flat about six months ago once their landlord found out they were on Universal Credit.
"Basically because we were on Universal Credit and he's had a lot of people not paying the rent... we got kicked out."
Garry says he has tried 58 private landlords across the town but no-one will take them.
"As soon as I go to meet them and say I am on Universal Credit, it's a no: 'We ain't got no rooms.'"
He says being homeless has affected his chances of finding work: "You need an address. It's a vicious circle."
He has even offered to pay rent and a deposit in advance "but they won't even do that".
"No-one's giving us the benefit of the doubt. You can't always judge everyone by what other people have done but that's what they're doing.
"I've walked down the street and there's been house after house empty... and no one will let us in."
The BBC understands Tory MPs, led by Heidi Allen, have written to Mr Gauke, demanding the national rollout of the policy be paused.
Shadow work and pensions secretary Debbie Abrahams welcomed the move, saying a "pause" could be used to bring in advance payments, rather than loans, for struggling families and to scrap charges for calling the Universal Credit helpline number, among other things.
Conservative MP Stephen McPartland said his concern with Universal Credit was that for "every pound these people earn, extra, the government's taking 63p back off them".
"To me that is an effective tax rate of 63%, which is ridiculous. So the lowest paid are effectively having to pay some of the highest taxes," he told BBC Radio 4's the World at One.
The Department of Work and Pensions said Universal Credit was working and people were moving into work faster and staying in work longer than under the old system.
"The vast majority of claimants are paid in full and on time, and are comfortable managing their money. Advance payments and budgeting support is available for anyone who needs extra help," a spokesman said.
Dame Louise first came to prominence as Tony Blair's "anti-social behaviour tsar" and also led a programme for David Cameron to tackle "troubled families". She has now left the government to work for an international homelessness charity.
She also told the BBC she was concerned that a report she published last year on integration had been placed in a box marked "too difficult".
The government has yet to issue a formal response to the review, which accuses public bodies of ignoring or condoning divisive or harmful religious practices for fear of being called racist.
///
Head teacher turns rebel over funding - BBC News, September 2017
Head teachers are usually known for getting people to stay in line, but Jules White has become a relentless rebel over school funding.
The Horsham head teacher has co-ordinated a letter warning of school cash shortages, which will reach 2.5 million homes on Thursday.
This direct line to parents' kitchen tables has put MPs under pressure.
And Mr White, along with 4,000 other heads sending the letter, won't stop until they get £1bn extra funding.
The head teacher of Tanbridge House School, in West Sussex, has formed a formidable lobbying operation over what he says is an unresolved crisis in school funding in England.
"It causes enormous anxiety and stress, trying to see how your school can run to the standards everyone expects," says Mr White.
"The system is under massive duress."
He distils this into two basic issues: "Not enough money, not enough teachers."
Enough extra?
Heads in local authorities from Cornwall to Norfolk have been protesting and contacting parents - pushing school funding up the list of issues facing MPs on the doorstep during the general election.
The government responded after the election by finding £1.3bn within the Department for Education's budget to be put into front-line spending on schools.
Schools funding has been protected in real terms for the next two years, alongside a new funding formula for sharing out the money.
But Mr White and his fellow head teachers remain unimpressed and have written to parents to say: "This is not enough to make a real difference."
"We were going bankrupt," says Mr White. "Now we're out of the financial gutter. We may be able to survive better."
The heads' campaign says that another £1bn over two years is needed for schools to have sustainable budgets.
"The only way you can make it work is to put back the money that has been taken out."
There remain big regional differences in schools facing similar levels of deprivation.
Mr White says his own school budget is £6.7m per year, but an equivalent school in inner London could receive £9.6m.
The consequence is bigger class sizes, staff cuts and fewer support services.
///
David Davis claims 'decisive steps forward' in Brexit talks - BBC News, September 2017
"Decisive steps forward" have been made in the latest round of UK-EU talks, Brexit Secretary David Davis has said.
Mr Davis was speaking at the end of the first talks since Theresa May's speech in Italy last week, in which she said the UK wanted a two-year transition.
But EU negotiator Michel Barnier said there were still "big gaps" between the sides on some of the withdrawal issues.
He said it could be "weeks or months" before they agreed to move to the next stage of talks about future relations.
The UK is keen to start talking about what kind of trading relationship it will have with the EU after Brexit, and the original aim had been to get the go-ahead for these discussions when EU leaders meet next month.
But the EU says those talks can only happen when there has been "sufficient progress" on three issues: the so-called divorce bill when the UK leaves, the rights for EU citizens in the UK and UK citizens in the EU and the Northern Ireland border.
In a rare joint statement, trade union group the TUC and the CBI, which represents British businesses, have called for urgent action from the EU and the UK government to guarantee citizens' rights.
They said: "After 15 months of human poker, the uncertainty facing four million European and UK citizens has become intolerable."
Mr Barnier said the UK had confirmed that EU citizens "will be able to invoke their rights before the UK courts" but the sides had failed to agree over the role of the European Court of Justice in securing those rights.
Mrs May insists the UK will not be subject to the European Court of Justice's rulings after Brexit.
Mr Davis echoed her view, saying that the UK will be "a third country outside the European Union and it would not be right for this role be performed by the European Court of Justice".
He gave an undertaking that the final withdrawal agreement would be incorporated into UK law, but Mr Barnier said the role of the European Court of Justice was "indispensible" and was "a stumbling block" in the talks.
On the other main issues of Northern Ireland and the financial settlement, Mr Davis again said constructive work had been done - but added that the UK was not at the stage of clarifying which financial commitments it accepted would need to be paid.
"We have begun drafting joint principles on preserving the common travel area" between the UK and Republic of Ireland, the Brexit secretary announced, adding: "We are both agreed that the Good Friday Agreement citizenship rights must be upheld."
Mr Barnier said any deal in this area must "respect both the integrity of the single market... and the Good Friday Agreement in all its parts".
///
Labour MP defends Prince Harry helicopter comments - BBC News, September 2017
A Labour MP who claimed Prince Harry cannot fly a helicopter has defended her comments.
Emma Dent Coad, who reportedly made the remarks at a Labour fringe event, said she was told "it's an absolute fact", but added that she could not prove it.
The MP for Kensington - which includes Kensington Palace - told the BBC taxpayers should not fund the monarchy.
Prince Harry qualified as an Apache helicopter commander in 2013. The Labour Party has declined to comment.
The MP, who was elected in June, told the BBC's Daily Politics: "Somebody else will tell me whether or not that's true but I've been told that's an absolute fact that somebody sits beside him and drives the helicopters for him."
John Woodcock, former chairman of Labour's backbench defence committee, issued a statement saying the "highly inaccurate comments" did not reflect the views of his party.
He said the prince deserved "praise and respect" for his service in the armed forces.
"I am really sorry this happened," he added.
Kensington Palace has not commented.
Shadow education secretary Angela Rayner said she was more interested in the contribution the Royal Family makes to the UK.
"We have different views in the Labour Party... but I actually think Prince William and Prince Harry have made the royal family more trendy again. I think there is a role for them - they're part of the staple British diet," she told the BBC.
Prince Harry served in the Army for 10 years, undertaking two tours of Afghanistan.
Harry is currently in Toronto for the Invictus Games - the sporting tournament for injured service personnel that he founded in 2014.
Defence minister Tobias Ellwood invited Ms Dent Coad to go the games, adding: "Learn how it started... and who inspires our injured heroes".
'Archaic system'
In an interview with the BBC, Ms Dent Coad questioned why the UK - as a modern democracy - was "buying into this archaic system".
"The immediate issue is why we are paying an absolute fortune in tax to people who are already very comfortably off for them to do charity work - which they do excellently - but half of north Kensington is doing charity work for nothing," she said.
Asked whether she called the Royal Family "ridiculous", she said: "I think my point was that the system is ridiculous.
"I don't know them, I'm sure they're perfectly decent human beings. My point is why are we paying taxes for that - and I did ask, would they get the job if they applied for the job?"
///
Boeing UK contracts 'jeopardised' over Bombardier row - BBC News, September 2017
Boeing's trade dispute with Bombardier "could jeopardise" its defence contracts with the UK government, the UK's defence secretary has warned.
Sir Michael Fallon made the comments after the US opted to impose a tax on the C-Series jet made by Bombardier.
The proposed 220% import tariff could threaten Bombardier jobs in Belfast.
Rival Boeing had complained that Bombardier had received unfair state subsidies from the UK and Canada.
It claimed these subsidies helped the firm win a major order.
In 2016, Boeing won a contract to supply 50 Apache helicopters to the Army.
Bombardier said it would fight the "absurd" ruling. The firm is one of Northern Ireland's biggest employers.
Prime Minster Theresa May said she was "bitterly disappointed" over the US Department of Commerce proposal to impose the tax.
She said the UK would work with Bombardier to protect "vital" jobs.
The UK government and trade unions fear the imposition of tariffs could make the Canadian firm question whether to remain in Northern Ireland, where it employs 4,100 of its 28,000-strong workforce.
The ruling damaged the global aerospace industry and was "frankly not what we would expect of a long-term partner to the UK", said a UK government spokesman, while emphasising this was just the first step in a lengthy process.
About 1,000 jobs are linked to the C-Series, the wings of which are made at a purpose-built £520m factory at Queen's Island in Belfast.
The programme is not just important to Bombardier jobs in Belfast, but also to 15 smaller aerospace firms in Northern Ireland - and dozens more across the UK - which make components for the wings.
The US Department of Commerce ruling, which could triple the cost of a C-Series aircraft sold into the United States, could potentially jeopardise a major order placed last year from US airline Delta - a $5.6bn (£4.15bn) deal for up to 125 of the jets.
Bombardier said the decision was "divorced from the reality about the financing of multibillion-dollar aircraft programmes".
The Canadian firm said Boeing was seeking to use US trade laws "to stifle competition".
///
Game of Thrones stars Kit Harington and Rose Leslie to wed - BBC News, September 2017
Game of Thrones stars Kit Harington and Rose Leslie have got engaged, it has been confirmed.
After a huge amount of speculation, an official announcement has been published in the Times newspaper.
The couple met on the fantasy show in 2012, where they played on-screen lovers Jon Snow and Ygritte.
Leslie left the cast two years later while Harington has become one of the show's biggest stars - appearing in all seven series of the popular TV drama.
They only made their public debut as a couple at last year's Olivier Awards.
Harington told L'Uomo Vogue last year it was "easy" to fall in love with Leslie.
He said his best ever memory of the show were the three weeks in Iceland when they filmed the second season in 2012.
"Because the country is beautiful, because the Northern Lights are magical, and because it was there that I fell in love," he said.
"If you're already attracted to someone, and then they play your love interest in the show, it becomes very easy to fall in love."
Leslie is currently starring in US television series The Good Fight.
Harington will next be seen in the BBC's drama Gunpowder, about the gunpowder plot, before he starts filming the next and final series of Game of Thrones.
///
Jeremy Corbyn: Labour on the threshold of power - BBC News, September 2017
Jeremy Corbyn is to tell supporters Labour is "on the threshold of power" and stands ready for government.
Addressing the party's conference in Brighton, he will say its general election showing has "put the Tories on notice", calling on ministers to "pull themselves together or make way".
He will also accuse the Conservatives of "self-interested Brexit bungling".
Aides said new policies would feature in the speech, in which he will also say business must be more accountable.
Mr Corbyn is expected to begin speaking around 12:30 BST.
After Labour gained 30 seats in June's general election and helped force a hung Parliament, much of the talk in Brighton has been about Mr Corbyn's party preparing for government.
His shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, has described "war games" style planning for different scenarios it could face, including a run on the pound, should it win power at a future election.
Mr Corbyn will attempt to present his party as a government-in-waiting as he closes the conference.
"Against all predictions, in June we won the largest increase in the Labour vote since 1945 and achieved Labour's best vote for a generation," he will say.
"It's a result which has put the Tories on notice and Labour on the threshold of power.
"Yes, we didn't do quite well enough and we remain in opposition for now. But we have become a government-in-waiting. And our message to the country could not be clearer: Labour is ready."
Mr Corbyn spent the summer touring close-fought seats, and Labour aides said the party was currently selecting candidates in 76 Labour-Tory marginals, who would be in place by the end of the year.
Brexit has been another theme of the conference, with differences between MPs about the relationship with the EU single market Labour should pursue.
'Ill-served'
In what his spokesman billed as a "substantial" section on the UK's departure from the EU, Mr Corbyn will point the finger at divisions in Tory ranks, saying the Conservatives are "more interested in posturing for personal advantage than in getting the best deal for Britain".
"Never has the national interest been so ill-served on such a vital issue. If there were no other reason for the Tories to go, their self-interested Brexit bungling would be reason enough," he will say.
"So I have a simple message to the cabinet: for Britain's sake pull yourself together or make way."
For much of his tenure, Mr Corbyn has faced heavy criticism from his MPs, including a no-confidence vote and a leadership challenge - but on Tuesday he told the BBC his party had united around his economic strategy.
Promising in government to "make public services accountable to communities" and "business accountable to the public", he will also say the challenge of automation must be urgently addressed.
"That is a threat in the hands of the greedy but what an opportunity if it's managed in the interests of society as a whole," he will say.
On Tuesday, Labour members backed changes to the party's rulebook, including a tightening of the rules on anti-Semitism after a debate about the extent it exists within Labour.
In an interview with BBC Newsnight, Unite chief Len McCluskey dismissed claims of an anti-Semitism problem in the party as "mood music that was created by people who were trying to undermine Jeremy Corbyn".
///
Alabama election pits Trump against his base - September 2017
A Republican Senate primary in Alabama is twisting Donald Trump and his party in knots and turning the president's supporters against each other.
Mr Trump has put his power and reputation on the line for the kind of Washington insider he used to rail against - a former corporate lobbyist who was appointed to the Senate by a governor who subsequently resigned in disgrace, no less.
Meanwhile erstwhile White House aides, rabble-rousing former Trump surrogates and even a member of the president's own Cabinet are lining up behind an upstart insurgent who almost no one in Washington wants to see roaming the halls of the Senate.
The senator and the judge
The president's man is Luther Strange, the former Alabama attorney general named to the seat Jeff Sessions vacated when he become US attorney general earlier this year.
Despite his Dickensian name and remarkably tall stature (6 feet, 9 inches), Mr Strange is an otherwise unremarkable politician, reserved in manner and unenthusiastic on the stump - a replacement-level senator from a reliably conservative state.
For an incumbent with his party's support, that's usually good enough to ensure a smooth nomination. Not this time, however.
With just a day left before a run-off vote for the Republican nomination, Mr Strange trails in opinion polls to Roy Moore, a man who has been called many things, but unremarkable and unenthusiastic are not among them.
The former Alabama chief justice and tireless evangelical firebrand once lost his job on the state's Supreme Court because he refused to obey a federal order to remove a massive sculpture of the biblical Ten Commandments from his courthouse.
He was elected by the people of Alabama to the court again, then was suspended - and subsequently resigned - for failing to enforce the US Supreme Court's 2015 ruling legalising gay marriage.
Mr Moore is a lawyer who says the laws of man are superseded by those of God; a politician campaigning to make life miserable for politicians in Washington.
Judge Moore and Senator Strange, a political odd couple if there ever were one, held an unusual, unmoderated hour-long debate in the state capital of Montgomery on Thursday night, and within minutes the gist of their campaigns were clear.
Mr Strange found a way every five minutes to note he had the backing of Mr Trump - who packed tens of thousands of supporters into a southern Alabama football stadium in August 2015. The senator positioned himself as the experienced hand who could help enact Mr Trump's agenda.
Mr Moore, on the other hand, was all fire and brimstone. He opened with a warning about the threat of "transgender troops in our bathrooms" - and went on from there.
"I want to see virtue and morality return to our country," he said. "Crime, corruption, immorality, abortion, sodomy, sexual perversion sweep our land."
When Mr Moore did talk about Mr Trump, it was to suggest that the president was being misled into supporting a man who was a rubber stamp for the hated powers in Washington.
A president 'sabotaged'
This is the conundrum at the heart of the Alabama special election.
Why is Mr Trump fighting on the side of the Washington establishment?
Why, in particular, is he making league with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, who the president - and many Alabama conservatives - hold most responsible for legislative failings in Congress this year?
The question perplexed Mr Moore's supporters at a post-debate rally just a handful of blocks away from Thursday night's debate site in Montgomery.
As a sign held up by Mobile resident Chu Green put it: "Mr President and Mr VP I love you, but you are WRONG! America needs Judge Moore."
"Judge and Trump, to me, are hand in hand," said Boyd Wainwright, a registered nurse from nearby Prattville. "It's a no-brainer."
Janet Oglesby, a retiree from Mobile, said the president is an "honourable" man who is being sabotaged by the members of his own party and even his own administration who are telling him to support Mr Strange.
///
US Marines get first female infantry officer - September 2017
A female US Marine has made history by becoming the first woman to complete the Corps' famously gruelling infantry officer training.
The lieutenant, who wants to keep her identity private, graduated in Quantico, Virginia, on Monday.
She will soon be assigned to lead a 40-strong platoon.
Marine Corps commandant Gen. Robert Neller tweeted a picture of the woman, saying he was "proud of this officer & her fellow leaders".
There are almost 1.4 million active duty troops in the US armed forces, and about 15% are female.
In March 2016, then-President Barack Obama opened all military positions to women, including combat units.
The 13-week officer training course started in July with 131 Marines, and 88 ultimately graduated.
The Corps says it educates would-be officers in "the leadership, infantry skills, and character required to serve as infantry platoon commanders".
Traditionally around a quarter of all applicants miss the mark, 10% of them on the first day.
The Corps has pushed harder to appeal to female recruits this year, after a nude photo scandal saw some Marines share naked photographs of female colleagues on Facebook.
In May it stoutly defended a recruitment advert - the first led by a woman - after critics said it pandered to political correctness.
In an opinion piece for the New York Times, former Marine captain Teresa Fazio said the female officer would be a major asset in Afghanistan.
"Female troops are invaluable for searching houses and communicating with local women, gaining access to spaces and information that, because of local custom, male troops cannot get," she wrote.
The Marine Corps tweeted a video showing the female officer engaged in exercises in the mountains alongside her male counterparts.
She will now be sent to the 1st Marine Division at Camp Pendleton, California, for her first assignment.
///
Young spend three times more on housing than grandparents - BBC News, September 2017
Young people in Britain are spending three times more on housing than their grandparents did, according to the Resolution Foundation think tank.
They also have to cope with less space and longer commutes to get to work.
While their parents typically bought their own home in their 30s, young people will soon have to wait until their 40s.
As a result, millennials are at the sharp end of Britain's "housing catastrophe", the report claims.
Those now in their 70s and 80s spent just 7% of their annual income on housing at the age of 30, it says.
The baby-boom generation - now in its 50s and 60s - spent 17% of income at the same age.
However, millennials - those now in their 20s and 30s - spend 23% of everything they earn on housing costs.
'Big danger'
The Resolution Foundation says youngsters are also living in smaller houses.
Since 1996, the average floor space occupied by someone under 45 has fallen by 4%. For those over that age, floor space has grown by 2%.
By the time the millennials reach the age of 40, they will each be spending an extra 64 hours a year commuting to work, compared with their parents, as they struggle to find housing they can afford.
"Britain's housing catastrophe has been 50 years in the making, but while its effects are widespread, it is millennials who are truly at the sharp end," said Lindsay Judge, one of the report's authors.
"The big danger today is that young people are having to settle for lower quality, longer commutes and less security in order to afford a place to live, despite spending a record share of their income of housing."
The Foundation - which campaigns for higher living standards - is calling on all the political parties to address the housing crisis.
///
Quarter of 14-year-old girls 'have signs of depression' - BBC News, September 2017
A quarter of girls and nearly one in 10 boys show signs of depression at the age of 14, say UK researchers.
The findings come from more than 10,000 young people who shared their worries and emotions.
Surveys with their parents, however, suggested many were not attuned to the true anxieties of their teenage sons and daughters.
Parents often underestimated daughters' stress and had concerns about sons that the boys themselves did not voice.
Lead investigator Dr Praveetha Patalay, from Liverpool University, said teenagers, and particularly girls, were facing more mental health difficulties than previous generations.
Half of all cases of adult mental illness start by the age of 14, and it is important they are diagnosed and treated early.
Demand for specialist services is growing, but child and adolescent mental health teams are overstretched and turn away nearly a quarter of the young patients referred to them, says the National Children's Bureau, which has published the survey findings.
Its chief executive, Anna Feuchtwang, said: "With a quarter of 14-year-old girls showing signs of depression, it's now beyond doubt that this problem is reaching crisis point.
"Worryingly, there is evidence that parents may be underestimating their daughters' mental health needs.
"Conversely, parents may be picking up on symptoms in their sons, which boys don't report themselves.
"It's vital that both children and their parents can make their voices heard to maximise the chances of early identification and access to specialist support."
Dr Marc Bush, from the charity Young Minds, said: "We know that teenage girls face a huge range of pressures, including stress at school, body image issues, bullying and the pressure created by social media.
"Difficult experiences in childhood, including bereavement, domestic violence or neglect, can also have a serious impact, often several years down the line.
"To make matters worse, it can be extremely difficult for teenagers to get the right support if they're struggling to cope.
"That's why it's crucial that mental health services are properly funded, with a focus on early intervention."
///
Trump: US would destroy North Korea if forced to defend itself - BBC News, September 2017
US President Donald Trump has told the UN General Assembly that America would destroy North Korea if forced to defend itself or its allies.
In his debut speech, he mocked North Korea's leader, Kim Jong-un, saying: "Rocket man is on a suicide mission."
North Korea has tested nuclear bombs and missiles in defiance of the UN.
Just before Mr Trump spoke, UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres had urged statesmanship, saying: "We must not sleepwalk our way into war."
The American leader also attacked Iran, saying it was a "corrupt dictatorship" which was intent on destabilising the Middle East.
He called on the government in Tehran to cease supporting terrorism and again criticised the Obama-era international agreement over Iran's nuclear programme, which he called an embarrassment.
Washington has repeatedly warned North Korea over its weapons tests, which violate UN Security Council resolutions.
The crisis worsened last month when the North announced plans to test missiles around the US Pacific territory of Guam.
"If the US is forced to defend itself or its allies, we will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea," Mr Trump said.
President Trump's threat to "totally destroy" North Korea is implausible, according to Stewart Patrick, a senior fellow at the New York think tank the Council on Foreign Relations.
"I actually am very sceptical," he told the BBC.
"I think the folks in the Pentagon when they look at military options are just aghast at the potential loss of life that could occur with at a minimum hundreds of thousands of South Koreans killed in Seoul.
"And I'm sure that for the South Korean government, the last thing on their mind right now is the notion that the United States should launch an attack, a pre-emptive attack of some sort on North Korea."
///
Rio Ferdinand: Retired footballer to launch pro boxing career - BBC News, September 2017
Rio Ferdinand is launching a new career as a professional boxer, two years after he retired from football.
The 38-year-old's move into the ring is being backed by betting company Betfair, which announced the news on Tuesday.
Former Manchester United and England defender Ferdinand works as a TV pundit and he has his own clothing line.
"I'm doing this because it's a challenge," he said. "I've won titles and now I'm aiming for a belt."
He has posted several social media videos in recent months showing him boxing and working with personal trainer Mel Deane.
Ferdinand, who won the Premier League six times and the Champions League once during his time in Manchester, may follow in the footsteps of former Birmingham City midfielder Curtis Woodhouse and former Crystal Palace forward Leon McKenzie, who became professional boxers after quitting football. Woodhouse became British super-lightweight champion.
Former England cricket captain Andrew Flintoff also launched a boxing career after retiring, winning his only pro bout in December 2012 against American Richard Dawson at Manchester Arena on points.
It was Betfair who approached Ferdinand about making the switch, and the betting company will help him qualify for his British Boxing Board of Control licence before he begins training and competing.
The company previously backed Victoria Pendleton in her transition from Olympic cyclist to Cheltenham jockey.
"When Betfair approached me about the challenge, the chance to prove myself in a new sport was a real draw," added Ferdinand.
He will be coached by Team GB coach and former WBC super-middleweight champion Richie Woodhall.
"In all honesty, I think Rio can definitely box as a professional given time. He has natural power in his right hand, is extremely fit and is very enthusiastic to learn which is encouraging," said Woodhall.
"Style wise, he's very raw and I'll have to develop this which will take time but he has all the natural ingredients, height and reach advantages over boxers in his weight division and definitely has potential to win a title in the future."
The former centre-back started his career with West Ham and also played for Leeds and QPR, making more than 500 career club appearances. He was capped 81 times for England.
Woodhouse told BBC Radio 5 live he was "shocked" to hear of Ferdinand's career change.
"When it came up on my Twitter feed that Rio Ferdinand was going to become a professional boxer I thought I'd been hacked," he said. "It's not something you read every day is it?
"I've been retired three years myself and one thing I missed - and he's probably going through himself at the minute - is the competitiveness of being an athlete.
"Once that's taken away from you it's very, very difficult to replace it, so that's probably what he's chasing - to get that competitiveness back in his life."
///
Rohingya crisis: Suu Kyi does not fear global 'scrutiny' - BBC News, September 2017
Myanmar's de facto leader Aung San Suu Kyi has said her government does not fear "international scrutiny" of its handling of the growing Rohingya crisis.
It was her first address to the country about the violence in northern Rakhine state that has seen more than 400,000 Rohingya Muslims cross into Bangladesh.
Ms Suu Kyi has faced heavy criticism for her response to the crisis.
But she said most Muslims had not fled the state and that violence had ceased.
In her speech in English to Myanmar's parliament, Aung San Suu Kyi said she felt "deeply" for the suffering of "all people" in the conflict, and that Myanmar was "committed to a sustainable solution… for all communities in this state".
Ms Suu Kyi, who has decided not to attend the UN General Assembly in New York later this week, said she nevertheless wanted the international community to know what was being done by her government.
What is the crisis about?
Rakhine has faced unrest and sporadic violence for years, but the current crisis began in August with an armed attack on police posts which killed 12 people.
That was blamed on a newly emerged militant group, the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (Arsa).
The Rohingya, a mostly Muslim minority, are denied citizenship and equal opportunities by the Myanmar government, which says they are illegal immigrants from Bangladesh. They are largely despised by the wider Burmese majority-Buddhist population.
The attack lead to a massive security crackdown by the military, which the UN's human rights chief later said seemed like a "textbook example of ethnic cleansing".
Rohingya Muslims started leaving in vast numbers, crossing into Bangladesh with tales of their villages being burned and saying they were facing persecution at the hands of the military. Thousands of Rohingya had already fled to Bangladesh in recent years.
Access is restricted to the area, but on a government-controlled trip for journalists the BBC found reason to question the official narrative that Muslims were setting fire to their own villages.
///
Pound hits highest since Brexit vote - BBC News, September 2017
The pound has hit its highest level against the dollar since the Brexit vote after a senior Bank of England official fuelled speculation it could raise rates in the coming months.
Gertjan Vlieghe, who has previously argued against a rate rise, said the "moment is approaching" when interest rates might need to go up.
The Bank kept rates at 0.25% this week, but hinted at a rise in the future.
Sterling rose more than 1% against the dollar to hit $1.3610.
That was its highest level since 24 June, the day after the Brexit vote.
The pound also gained more than 1% against the euro to rise above 1.13 euros.
Analysts have suggested the Bank could now lift interest rates back to 0.5%, the level they were before the EU referendum, as soon as November.
Mr Vlieghe, a member of the Bank's interest rate-setting committee, said in a speech on Friday: "Until recently, I thought the appropriate response of monetary policy was to be patient, given modest growth and subdued underlying inflationary pressure.
"But the evolution of the data is increasingly suggesting that we are approaching the moment when Bank Rate may need to rise."
Mr Vlieghe, who was the first Bank member to vote for a rate cut after the Brexit vote, said there was now growing evidence the UK economy was picking up.
'Concerted effort'
He pointed to unemployment falling to record lows, as well as signs that households are spending more and that wages are rising in the private sector.
"If these data trends of reducing slack, rising pay pressure, strengthening household spending and robust global growth continue, the appropriate time for a rise in Bank Rate might be as early as in the coming months," Mr Vlieghe said.
Markets which track investors' expectations for the Bank rate now give a 63% likelihood of a rise in November, the highest since the Brexit vote. At the start of the week the futures markets gave only a 20% chance.
The return on government bonds, often influenced by interest rate expectations, also hit 15-month highs on Friday.
The yield on five-year UK bonds rose 7 basis points to hit 0.772%, the highest since 23 June, 2016, the day Britain voted to leave the European Union.
Howard Archer, chief economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said: "Vlieghe's comments will support belief that the Bank of England could well raise interest rates before the end of 2017 with a move as soon as November very much in play."
Mr Archer cautioned that the Bank of England had "talked up the likelihood of an interest rate hike then failed to follow through" in the past.
"But there does seem to be a more concerted effort this time around and more unanimity within the Monetary Policy Committee of the case for a hike," he said.
The Bank said on Thursday that higher inflation and a pick up in growth could lead to a rate rise soon.
Growing speculation of a rate rise lifts the pound against other currencies because higher interest rates would make sterling more attractive to investors.
The Bank dropped heavy hints in 2014, and again last year before the EU referendum, that it could raise rates, only to later change course.
///
Sir James Dyson expects no Brexit deal - BBC News, September 2017
Leave campaigner Sir James Dyson expects the UK to leave the EU with no deal, and trade to default to World Trade Organization rules and tariffs.
Sir James, who founded the engineering firm Dyson, told the BBC such an arrangement would "hurt the Europeans more than the British".
However, former Bank of England chief Lord King said he was "not impressed" with preparations for failed talks.
It is "very important" the UK has a fall-back position, he said.
"I don't think the negotiations are going in the way that we might hope," he told the BBC's Newsnight programme.
"I think you need a separate team that is responsible for insuring that if negotiations do break down... then we are capable of saying if you don't want an agreement, we are capable of leaving and trading with you under, for example, WTO terms. It's not a first preference, but we can do it."
'No single market'
Sir James told the BBC's Today programme that Dyson, which became famous through its innovative vacuum cleaners, already pays the WTO tariff into Europe "and it hasn't hurt us at all - we're one of the fastest growing companies in Europe".
He said UK business did not need a transitional period to separate from the European single market, saying he thought the term "single market" was "quite wrong".
"It's a series of different markets with different languages, with different marketing required and different laws.... it's actually a very highly complex and broken up market," he said.
Sir James added that "business is about uncertainty".
"There's always uncertainty in business, about exchange rates, conditions in markets, natural disasters...
"I think uncertainty is an opportunity, and the opportunity here is actually that the rest of the world is growing at a far greater rate than Europe, so the opportunity is to export to the rest of the world and to capitalise on that," he said.
'No illusions'
However, the chairman of the John Lewis Partnership, Sir Charlie Mayfield, told the Today programme that the pound and business confidence had been hit by the Brexit vote.
"We should be under no illusions, Brexit is having an effect on the economy, no question. It's the same for everybody, and the main effects are sterling and confidence.
"Uncertainty is one of the consequences of this, and of course businesses never like uncertainty, because it makes it hard to plan for the future.
He called for "a serious parliamentary debate, to figure out what kind of Brexit we're going to have in the best interests of the country and the economy."
'Dyson degree'
Sir James' comments came as 33 undergraduates began studying at the Dyson Institute of Engineering and Technology.
The student engineers have begun a four-year degree, during which they will be mentored by Dyson's scientists and engineers who will teach alongside academics from Warwick University.
Universities Minister Jo Johnson challenged Sir James 18 months ago to help train engineers in the UK.
Sir James said: "It is a great opportunity, and I think a great step forward in the way that higher education is provided.
"We're paying these people, they're getting about 40 days a year more academic time than you'd get at university, plus the fact that they're working with some of the best scientists and engineers in the world."
///
Brexit: UK will 'soon regret' leaving EU argues Juncker - BBC News - September 2017
The UK will "soon regret" leaving the EU, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has said.
Mr Juncker told the European Parliament that Brexit would be a "sad, tragic" moment for the EU but that the 27-member union would "move on".
"Brexit is not the future of Europe. It is not the be all and end all."
But, speaking in the same debate, ex-UKIP leader Nigel Farage said the EU had "learnt nothing" from Brexit and was ploughing "full steam ahead".
In his state of the union speech in Strasbourg, Mr Juncker proposed an EU summit on the day after Brexit, 30 March 2019, in the Romanian city of Sibiu to map out the future of the European Union.
He called for closer economic and defence co-operation among member states, including more support for states outside the eurozone to prepare them to join the single currency, and reforms to the single market.
Reflecting on the economic and political challenges that the continent had faced in recent years, he said the "wind is back in Europe's sails".
While he respected the choice of the British people to go their own way, he said the UK's exit would prove a "very sad, tragic moment in our history" which we "will always regret".
Responding to UKIP MEPs in the chamber, who had cheered the mention of the UK's exit, he added - in an off-the-cuff remark not included in advance copies of the speech - "I think you will regret it as well soon, if I might say."
But he went on to stress that Brexit "was not everything" and an increasingly confident EU would continue to advance, focusing as he put it on the big strategic challenges rather than "the small things".
'More Europe'
Mr Farage, the best known campaigner in the Parliament for the UK's withdrawal from the EU, attacked what he said were "truly worrying" plans to create a single president of the EU, an EU finance minister and a "strong EU army in a militarised Europe".
He said what was being proposed was "more Europe in every single direction... without the consent of the people".
He also warned the idea of allowing future candidates to the European Parliament to stand on transnational tickets, rather than representing nation states, was anti-democratic and "reminiscent of regimes of old".
"You have learnt nothing from Brexit. If you had offered David Cameron concessions, particularly on immigration, I would have to admit that the Brexit vote would never ever have happened," he said.
Telling MEPs "thank God we are leaving", Mr Farage said the EU was "deluding itself" if it believed the "populist wave" of protests against the established European political order was over.
Responding to Mr Juncker's comments, justice minister Sam Gyimah said his initial reaction was "he would say that, wouldn't he" and he had signalled a future direction for Europe that "Britain was never going to go in".
Rather than "berating Britain", the Conservative MP told the BBC's Daily Politics that the EU's best interests would be served by agreeing a Brexit deal which made the whole of Europe more prosperous and secure.
Negotiations between the UK and EU are continuing although the latest round of talks, due to begin on Monday, have been put back a week to allow "more time for consultation".
Speaking on Tuesday, former Brexit minister Lord Bridges said the UK must be "honest" about the "complexity and scale" of leaving the EU as well as the lack of time to reach agreement with the EU.
And France's economy minister has sounded a warning that it will aggressively target new business as it seeks to make Paris the pre-eminent financial centre on the continent.
Changes to the country's labour laws meant France would become the "place to be" for financial services, Benjamin Griveaux told BBC Radio 4's Today, while acknowledging London would remain a major player.
"We need to have a fair Brexit, but we need to move on and we need probably more clarity and less ambiguity from the British government regarding the target of Brexit," he added.
///
Sir Peter Hall: Theatre giant dies aged 86 - BBC News, September 2017
Sir Peter Hall, the founder of the Royal Shakespeare Company and former National Theatre director, has died at the age of 86.
He died on Monday at University College hospital in London, surrounded by his family, the National Theatre said.
During his career he staged the English language premiere of Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Godot and the world premiere of Harold Pinter's Homecoming.
Sir Peter had been diagnosed with dementia in 2011.
Sir Peter became director of the National in 1973 and was responsible for the theatre's move from the Old Vic to the purpose-built complex on the South Bank.
He founded the RSC at the age of just 29 in 1960 and led the company until 1968.
Tributes have been paid to Sir Peter by many in the theatre world.
Speaking to Radio 4's World at One, actress Vanessa Redgrave described Sir Peter as "a very extraordinary, interesting and fascinating director".
"He was very mischievous, very handsome, an extremely attractive man who everyone fell in love with... he was everything really, a kind of Shelley in the theatre."
Actor Sir Michael Gambon said Sir Peter "never stopped working".
Several stars have credited Sir Peter with helping launch their careers, Sir Patrick Stewart being among them.
Rufus Norris, current director of the National Theatre, said: 'We all stand on the shoulders of giants and Peter Hall's shoulders supported the entirety of British theatre as we know it.
"All of us, including those in the new generation of theatre-makers not immediately touched by his influence, are in his debt. His legendary tenacity and vision created an extraordinary and lasting legacy for us all."
///
UK inflation rate rises to 2.9% - BBC News, September 2017
The UK's inflation rate climbed to its joint highest in more than five years in August as the price of petrol and clothing rose.
UK inflation measured by the Consumer Prices Index rose to 2.9% in August, up from 2.6% in July, figures show.
The fall in the value of sterling since the EU referendum continued to be a major impetus for rising prices, the Office for National Statistics said.
But a rebound in the price of oil also had an impact, pushing up fuel prices.
The bigger-than-expected rise in inflation comes ahead of the Bank of England's next announcement on interest rates on Thursday.
However, economists said the Bank was still highly unlikely to raise rates at the meeting.
Rising clothing costs
According to the ONS, the prices of most goods climbed during August, largely because of rising import costs for retailers.
However, clothing and footwear prices had the biggest impact, climbing 4.6% year-on-year, their highest level since records began.
Petrol also pushed the overall cost of living higher, increasing 1.8p a litre to 115.7p during the month, while diesel gained 2p to 117.6p.
Pound hits year high on inflation data
Housing costs rising fastest in the East Midlands
The TUC's general secretary, Frances O'Grady, said the "cost of living squeeze" was continuing, with rising inflation outpacing wages.
"The government needs to get a grip and get pay rising across the economy," she said.
The most recent wages data showed average weekly earnings rising at an annual pace of 2.1%. New figures on pay are due to be released on Wednesday.
Ian Stewart, chief economist at Deloitte, said: "It is pretty remarkable that, with inflation near 3% and unemployment at the lowest level in over 40 years, we are not seeing much wage inflation."
August's inflation rate is far above the Bank of England's target of 2%. The Bank has said it expects inflation to reach 3% in October, but start to ease early in 2018.
Paul Hollingsworth, UK economist at Capital Economics, said the latest figures were likely to provide "further ammunition" to those members of the Bank's rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee who favour an earlier rise in interest rates.
"However, we don't think the rise in CPI inflation has much further to run," he added.
"Indeed, we expect it to peak at 3.1% in October, before dropping back next year as the impact of the pound's fall starts to fade."
Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, added: "We still think the chances of a rate rise this year are remote.
"Domestically-generated inflation is subdued, inflation expectations have remained well-anchored and GDP growth is too weak to warrant higher rates."
The ONS's preferred measure of inflation CPIH - which includes owner-occupiers' housing costs - rose to 2.7% last month from 2.6% in July.
The Retail Prices Index (RPI) measure of inflation rose to 3.9% in August from 3.6%.
///
Hurricane Irma: Florida launches huge relief operation - BBC News, September 2017
Relief operations are under way in Florida, as the extent of the damage from Hurricane Irma is becoming clear.
The storm weakened as it moved up the state's western coast overnight but Miami and other urban areas have been battered and flooded.
Six million homes - 62% of the entire state - are without power. In the islands of the Florida Keys, officials have warned of a "humanitarian crisis".
Media reports link at least four deaths to the storm.
Irma, which hit Florida as a category four hurricane on Sunday, has now been downgraded to a tropical storm.
It cut a devastating track across Caribbean islands, killing at least 37 people there.
Florida Governor Rick Scott said it was "going to take some time" before people could return to their homes, the Miami Herald website reports.
Speaking as he went on an aerial tour of the Keys to survey the damage early on Monday, he said: "Power lines are down throughout the state. We've got roads that are impassable, so everybody's got to be patient as we work through this."
All eyes on the Keys
By Jane O'Brien, BBC News, Miami
Miami dodged a bullet by and large. The eye of the storm did not hit the city but it did wallop the Florida Keys, of course, and that is where the concern is now.
Communications were pretty bad even on Friday. A number of people who had fled the Keys and checked into our hotel were struggling to keep in touch with relatives who had decided to stay behind.
Reports say that 10,000 people decided to ride out the storm. We do not know what state they are in now.
The first job rescue services will have to do is to test the integrity of the 42 bridges linking the Keys. If one of those is down, it could cause problems because it could strand any one of the islands.
The entire Keys are closed. There is no way of getting in there at the moment while the authorities assess the damage.
How big will the disaster response be?
Power lines came down in 80% of Miami alone and large areas of the city were flooded, although the city appears to have escaped lightly compared to other parts.
Drone footage from Naples, a town on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico about 125 miles (200km) to the north-west, shows rows of shattered suburban homes on streets under water.
President Donald Trump has approved a major disaster declaration and emergency federal aid for Florida, describing the hurricane as a "big monster".
Funds will be needed to care for victims, clean up debris, restore power, and repair damage to homes and businesses.
Martin Senterfitt, emergency management director for Monroe County (population 73,000), said a huge airborne relief mission mounted by the Air Force and Air National Guard was in the works, the Miami Herald reports.
"Disaster mortuary teams", he said on Sunday afternoon, would be dispatched to the Keys, which are part of Monroe.
Florida Director of Emergency Management Bryan Koon told reporters the actual physical and human damage could not be ascertained before operations began.
///
Why is Bulgaria's population falling off a cliff? - BBC News, September 2017
Bulgaria is projected to have the fastest-shrinking population in the world. It's already lost a fifth of its population since the 1990s. But what does this mean for those who remain?
Deep in the Bulgarian countryside, in the western province of Pernik, I make a rare discovery.
It's not Stoyan Evtimov's traditional embroidered woollen tunic that makes him unusual.
It's the fact he's a thirty-something living in a village. "All my friends that I grew up with here left long ago," he says.
Like many young Bulgarians, they moved to towns and cities in search of work.
Stoyan considers himself lucky to have employment in the mountain village of Peshtera, leading its folk-singing group and organising an annual music festival in an attempt to revive traditional marriage music, and the village.
Even so, he is finding village life unsustainable.
"It's impossible to find someone to marry here in the village, or the villages around, simply because there are no young people. The only chance for me to find someone is in the town," he says.
"It would be very sad and hard for me to leave the village, but I will have to do it at some point."
Bulgarian villages have been losing people for decades.
When the Communists took power after World War Two, they brought in collective farming and many agricultural workers found work in new factories.
After Communism fell, in 1989, and collective farms were broken up, that trend of leaving the countryside for the towns sharpened.
And many people don't stop there: they continue their search for work abroad.
In 1989, almost nine million people lived in Bulgaria. Now, it is a little over seven million. By 2050, that number is projected to be less than 5.5 million. By the end of the century, it could be close to half what it is now.
This exodus contributes to another factor in Bulgaria's dwindling population numbers - in part because a lot of young adults have left the country, the birth rate is low.
The last time a baby was born in the village, recalls shopkeeper Stefka - whose own two sons have moved away to the city - was a decade ago. The little girl and her mother now live in Cyprus, she adds.
The vast majority of the people Stefka serves are over the age of 60. The shelves are sparsely stocked, she says, because there aren't many customers, and she worries the shop will have to close.
Higher up the mountain, the village shops have already shut, along with schools and bus services.
"This village used to be made up of about 600 people," says Boyan, a 70-year-old living in Kalotinsi. "Now we are 13. Some are in the cemetery, the rest are in towns."
In the village of Smirov Dol, Stanka Petrova - Granny Stanka to those who know her - sits under a tree at a bend in the mountain road, patiently waiting for the mobile shop, which serves the area.
"I was born in this village, and I remember the village when it was really full of people. It was such a fun and nice life. Young people, old people," she says, explaining that this is the spot where people would come together and enjoy traditional dancing.
"There is no-one in the village, so of course nothing like that can happen now," she says.
"In this street, for example, that I came from, in the past there were a lot of people in the houses. Now only I live there."
Does she get lonely? "Of course I'm lonely. It's very hard," she says, tearfully.
The people in Kalotinsi and surrounding villages buy their groceries from a mobile shop that visits three times a week.
The service is run by middle-aged husband-and-wife team Atanas and Lili Borisov.
Their unmarked van is well-stocked with everything from bread and yoghurt to cigarettes and beer, and even medicines. In 10 years, they've never missed a delivery, even though in winter the mountain roads are covered in snow.
"Because there are few people, we are friends with all of them, so we're trying to help them with all that we can," Lili says.
It's obvious they're popular with the people they're serving, but Lili says customer numbers, and profits, are dwindling. In business and personal terms, the mobile shop is at the sharp end of the depopulation of Bulgaria's countryside.
"We start worrying when someone doesn't appear at the normal place we meet them," Lili says, "especially during the winter."
"We had a case, actually, where we found someone dead."
The government is introducing a number of measures to try to tackle depopulation by increasing the birth rate: offering help with the costs of fertility treatment, giving childcare, and mortgage support.
It is also encouraging ethnic Bulgarians who live abroad to return to the country, but no-one else.
"Bulgaria doesn't need uneducated refugees," says Deputy Prime Minister Valeri Simeonov, a leader of the United Patriots, an anti-immigrant grouping forming part of the coalition government.
Nor would Bulgarian society accept educated and skilled migrants, Mr Simeonov says.
"They have a different culture, different religion, even different daily habits," he says. "And thank God Bulgaria so far is one of the most-well defended countries from Europe's immigrant influx."
Mr Simeonov is referring to a razor-wire fence that Bulgaria has been building across its 260km (160 mile) border with Turkey to discourage immigrants from trying to enter the country.
According to figures from the European Commission, Bulgaria had taken in only about 50 of the migrants who arrived in Europe from North Africa and the Middle East between 2015 and July 2017.
It is clear that the Bulgarian government does not see immigration as a possible solution to the country's dwindling population.
Although the government is full of ideas to boost the number of Bulgarian babies being born, in the countryside the feeling is that politicians talk, but don't act.
Before I left the mountains, I bumped into Boyan again, the man living in Kalotinsi, which has shrunk from being a village of 600 people to one of 13.
"We are abandoned," he says. "Abandoned from everyone - from rulers and from God.
"Politicians will not do anything for us. They're just interested in their own interests. They don't care about the people - especially the old people in the villages. They don't even care about the young people because the young people are abroad.
"So the politicians don't care at all and the Bulgarian state is disappearing."
Ruth Alexander's report from Bulgaria is on Crossing Continents, on BBC Radio 4 at 11:00 on Thursday 7 September. You can listen online or download the programme podcast.
///
Prince George set for first day of school - BBC News, September 2017
Prince George is to begin his first day at school - but his mother, the Duchess of Cambridge, will miss the occasion as she is not well enough to take him.
Kensington Palace said Prince William will drop him off as Catherine, who is suffering from severe morning sickness, is still unwell.
The four-year-old will attend Thomas's Battersea, a £18,000-a-year preparatory school in south-west London.
His uniform includes navy shorts and jacket, long red socks and black shoes.
The milestone for the prince comes after the Duke and Duchess this week announced they are expecting their third child.
Catherine had to pull out of public engagements on Monday and Tuesday because she is suffering from hypremesis gravidarum, as with her previous two pregnancies.
A spokesperson from the palace said: "Unfortunately the Duchess of Cambridge remains unwell, and will not be able to accompany Prince George on his first day of school.
"The Duke of Cambridge will drop off Prince George this morning as planned."
Prince George will follow in the footsteps of his father and uncle, Prince Harry, who both attended preparatory school at a young age.
Notable alumni at Thomas's Battersea include pop singer Florence Welch - from Florence and the Machine - model and actress Cara Delevingne, and Fresh Meat star Charlotte Ritchie.
His new school was described by the Good Schools Guide as: "A big, busy, slightly chaotic school for cosmopolitan parents who want their children to have the best English education money can buy."
Navy Bermuda shorts
Previously, Prince George attended nursery at the Westacre Montessori School, in Norfolk.
However, his move to London coincides with the duke and duchess's decision to begin moving their main residence to Kensington Palace, as Prince William takes on more royal duties.
Prince George, who is often pictured wearing shorts and knee-high socks, will continue this sartorial staple at Thomas's.
Pupils in reception class wear red polo neck shirts, navy Bermuda shorts and knee-high red socks with navy trimming.
The prince will also wear a v-neck jersey emblazoned with the Thomas's emblem, as well as a navy jacket.
///
EU: Northern Ireland 'should have different Brexit deal' - BBC News, September 2017
The European Union wants Northern Ireland to have a different Brexit deal to the rest of the UK, papers seen by the BBC suggest.
The document says the UK should take responsibility for finding a "unique solution" so people can work, go to school or get medical treatment either side of the Irish border.
Details will be published by the EU's chief negotiator Michel Barnier later.
He has said "a lot more substantial work" is needed on the border issue.
The EU's position paper comes as MPs prepare to debate the EU Withdrawal Bill in Parliament. The legislation will convert all existing EU laws into domestic ones ahead of Brexit - due to take effect at the end of March 2019.
Ministers said passing the legislation would form an "essential foundation" for post-Brexit Britain, but Labour has vowed to vote against it as it stands, calling it a power grab by the government.
The EU will release a series of position papers later as the debate in the House of Commons gets under way.
Plans to protect Irish cross-border co-operation in areas like health, education, transport and fishing will feature, as well as proposals around issues such as data protection, intellectual property and customs arrangements.
Ireland's place in the EU's single market or customs union is also mentioned in the document.
It says nothing can affect the country's membership even though the UK government has already said it would leave the customs union.
But, the EU has also reminded Britain that negotiations can only move on when it rules "sufficient progress" has been made on issues of citizens' rights and the UK's financial obligations.
The UK government released its own position paper on Northern Ireland last month.
It called for an "unprecedented solution" for the border and stressed there should be no physical infrastructure - such as customs posts - anywhere along it.
But critics said the proposals lack credible detail, with Labour deriding the plans as "a fantasy frontier".
///
The hidden history of cyber-crime forums - BBC News, September 2017
The notorious dark web marketplaces Alphabay and Hansa were shut down in July following "landmark" action by police forces in the US and Europe to unmask who was running them.
They join a long list of other forums, chat rooms and boards that appeared and were blazingly popular with the criminal underworld before they were compromised and closed.
But those sites, including Dark Market, Carders Market, Shadow Crew, Carder.su, Darkode, GhostMarket and the Silk Road, have more in common than just the trajectory of their genesis and demise.
They all follow the modus operandi of a landmark forum set up in 2001 called Carder Planet. Designed for criminals who specialised in monetising lists or "dumps" of credit card numbers, it has had an influence far beyond that select group.
"Carder Planet created the framework for the current criminal underground," said Andrei Barysevich, now a director at security firm Recorded Future but who, at the time the site operated, was helping to monitor cyber-crime in Eastern Europe.
Expert view
The site was set up online shortly after a face-to-face meeting at a restaurant in Odessa attended by some of Ukraine and Russia's top credit card thieves, said Mr Barysevich.
"Odessa was, and still is, the ground zero for cyber-crime," he said. "It is a very criminalised city and a centre of white collar crime."
Before Carder Planet was set up, anyone who wanted to make money from stealing card numbers had to be a jack of all trades, said Liam O'Murchu, a researcher at Symantec who has spent years tracking online crime forums.
Not only did they have to find ways to steal the card numbers, often involving malware or hacking, they also had to work out how to turn those numbers into cash and not get caught.
"What they decided to do was pool everyone's resources, so they did not have to be perfectly skilled in everything in order to be able to do crime," he said.
"They set up the forum where people could come together and trade skills and nobody had to be an expert in the entire chain from beginning to end," said Mr O'Murchu.
The site proved an immediate success and soon had thousands of members all busily trading with each other.
"They got so blase and so sure of themselves that they organised the first real life meet-up of Carder Planet members," said Mr Barysevich. "Forum members were invited to a resort outside Odessa where they hung out together.
"They had good food, drink and girls and had a pretty good time," he said.
It was not only the attendees who enjoyed themselves. The police did too because news about the conference, as well as pictures of attendees, were leaked to the authorities. It was the first time that many of the cyber-thieves had been photographed and the images were widely studied, he said.
Shopping growth
Despite the attention, Carder Planet kept going and enjoyed significant success, said Dmitri Alperovitch, a veteran cyber-crime researcher, who has helped to track down and expose some of its key members.
"It was the right place at the right time," he said. "You had a lot of smart folks in Russia and Ukraine at the time and you had the proliferation of the internet in those days in the former Soviet Union and the economy was doing very, very poorly."
Given that, he said, it was not surprising that those with technical skills and nothing legitimate to do with them turned to crime.
Coupled with this was the rise of online shopping in the US, much of which was powered by people using credit cards. Unfortunately, many of the firms setting up online were better at selling than security, meaning the thieves were regularly able to steal large amounts of card numbers.
Mr Alperovitch said the board explicitly modelled itself on more traditional organised crime groups - specifically the Italian mafia.
Occasional contributors were called "soldiers" and the more someone got involved the higher up the ranks they rose. At the top, he said, were the "dons" and "capos" who ran the biggest scams and collected financial tributes from the people they set working on them.
He said it was also a board on which reputation mattered a lot - a trait seen on many other criminal forums ever since.
Before any criminals worked together they looked for "vouches" - essentially personal recommendations from other thieves about whether someone was trustworthy or not. Without those endorsements a collaboration between say a spammer and a malware writer was unlikely to get started. Anyone with a persistently bad reputation would find that no-one would work with them.
Carder Planet was shut down voluntarily by its creators in 2004 - largely to avoid the fate of other boards, many of which were compromised by police and used to gather intelligence about members.
Many of its members did keep on stealing cards and some of them, notably Roman Vega (aka Boa) and Vladislav Horohorin (aka Badb), have been tracked down and arrested.
Those arrests were a consequence of the open atmosphere on Carder Planet, said Mr Alperovitch.
"They've realised they were quite naive about law enforcement engagement and they did not realise that law enforcement was paying very close attention," he said.
///
Universities want rethink on costs for poorer students - BBC News, September 2017
More than a hundred universities are calling for a rethink on the costs for poorer students in England.
Universities UK says ministers should look again at grants for living costs and interest rates for some graduates.
Liberal Democrat leader Sir Vince Cable told the BBC the existing system was "politically difficult to sustain".
Ministers have defended current tuition fees of £9,250 a year as providing sustainable funding for universities and fairness for graduates.
Universities UK, which represents higher education bodies, says the government must show it is listening to students.
It says the main concern for young people is "money in their pocket" while they are studying.
Vice chancellors are meeting this week amid growing political concern that the system no longer feels fair to young people.
Debts 'of £57,000'
Prof Janet Beer, the new president of Universities UK, will call on ministers to look again at maintenance grants for students most in need of help with living costs.
In England, grants for living costs were scrapped last year and replaced with loans, leading to predictions that students from the poorest families would have the largest debts.
The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimated this would add up to debts of £57,000 for students from low income families.
In an interview with the BBC, Prof Beer said: "We've done a poor job at explaining the good things in the system, but there are things that can be looked at again, the threshold for repayment, interest rates and maintenance grants."
The board of Universities UK met on Tuesday and agreed to press ministers to look again at some aspects of the overall cost of a university education.
The government has confirmed that from this autumn, a new higher interest rate of 6.1% will be levied on student tuition fee loans, calculated as RPI +3%.
Now universities are calling for a rethink from ministers on the interest charges for some graduates.
Universities UK has decided to call for different thresholds for interest rates for graduates that go on to become low or middle earners.
Sir Vince oversaw the introduction of £9,000 tuition fees in government as business secretary.
He still defends the principle of graduates contributing through their higher earnings to the funding of universities.
But speaking exclusively to me this week he said: "The system is becoming politically difficult to sustain."
The significant vote by young people for Labour - whose policy is to replace tuition fees with direct government subsidy to universities - has shifted the political landscape.
Sir Vince said: "We are already seeing the beginnings of a revolt."
And he signalled that other ways of taxing graduate wealth might need to be considered to make the system fairer.
"Those of us involved in trying to create a fairer system in the past have got to be willing to reopen some of the basic questions about how the system operates. The interest fixing is bizarre, economically nonsensical."
He also wants to see more support for living costs for students and better help for those who go through further education.
'Not broken'
Only the highest paid graduates are expected to pay off their tuition fee loans in full before the 30-year term expires.
The rest is written off by the government, but unlike funding universities from current spending, the final bill does not appear as part of government borrowing.
Jo Johnson, the minister for higher education, has argued that the fact many graduates do not repay their loans in full is not a sign of failure.
In a speech earlier in the summer, he said the sharing of costs between students and the state was "a conscious investment in the skills base of the country, not a symptom of a broken student finance system."
The government has to decide within weeks whether to confirm the inflation-linked increase in fees to about £9,500 expected by universities in England for 2018/19.
Universities now rely heavily on the income from tuition fees, as the almost tripling of fees to £9,000 in 2012 coincided with the withdrawal of direct government funding.
///
Brexit: Leaked document suggests UK plan to curb EU migration
Proposals aimed at cutting the numbers of low-skilled migrants from Europe following Brexit have been disclosed in a leaked Home Office paper.
The document, obtained by The Guardian, suggests free movement will end upon exit in March 2019 and the UK will adopt a "more selective approach" based on the UK's economic and social needs.
Access to labour in industries without shortages may be curbed, it suggests.
The BBC understands the document has not been signed off by ministers.
A spokesman for the government said it did not comment on "leaked draft" documents.
They said ministers would be setting out their "initial proposals" for a new immigration system "which takes back control of the UK's borders" later in the autumn.
Downing Street has long maintained that the current unconditional right of EU citizens to live and work in the UK will come to an end on the day that the UK leaves the 28-member bloc.
It is also likely that there will be an implementation period to minimise disruption to businesses and to the public services, many of which are heavily reliant on European labour.
However, details of the likely shape of the UK's post-Brexit immigration policy remain hazy with a proposed immigration bill, one of eight pieces of Brexit-related legislation, yet to be published.
Passport needed
The Home Office document obtained by the Guardian, entitled the Border, Immigration and Citizenship System After the UK Leaves the EU, is marked extremely sensitive and dated August 2017.
Among the ideas set out, the 82-page document suggests low-skilled migrants would be offered residency for a maximum of two years while those in "high-skilled occupations" would be granted permits to work for a longer period of three to five years.
Employers would be encouraged to focus recruitment on "resident labour" and EU nationals could be required to seek permission before taking up a job. While there would be no new border checks on entering the country, all EU citizens will be required to show a passport.
"The government will take a view on the economic and social needs of the country as regards EU migration, rather than leaving this decision entirely to those wishing to come here and employers," it states.
It also floats the idea of ending the right to settle in Britain for most European migrants and placing new restrictions on their rights to bring in family members.
The new measures, it indicates, would only come fully into force at the end of a transition period, which could last up to three years. It is understood that the document is a draft, unfinished version of an upcoming White Paper circulated among senior officials and that there have been at least five earlier versions.
A leading campaigner for tougher migration controls said the document's thinking was "excellent news".
"Uncontrolled migration from the EU simply cannot be allowed to continue," said Lord Green, chairman of Migration Watch. "These proposals rightly focus on low-skilled migration and by doing so could reduce net migration from the EU by 100,000 a year over time.
"This would be an important step to achieving the government's immigration target."
'Confused'
UKIP also welcomed the proposals, saying they should be implemented "without fudging" and prioritise the needs of communities up and down the country as well as those of workers and businesses.
However, Labour MP Yvette Cooper said the document appeared to fly in the face of Home Secretary Amber Rudd's commitment earlier this summer to consult on a post-Brexit immigration system.
"The process for developing its policy seems to be completely confused. What assessment has been done of the impact or the interrelationship between immigration proposals and any trade or single market deal?"
The TUC said the "back of the envelope plans" would "create an underground economy, encouraging bad bosses to exploit migrants and undercut decent employers offering good jobs".
The government has said it is sticking by its target of cutting levels of net migration from about 250,000 last year to less than 100,000 despite calls from the opposition and some Conservative MPs for it to be dropped.
///
Neo-Nazi arrests: National Action suspects are in the Army
Four serving members of the Army have been arrested under anti-terror laws on suspicion of being members of banned neo-Nazi group National Action.
The men are a 22-year-old from Birmingham, a 32-year-old from Powys, a 24-year-old from Ipswich and a 24-year-old from Northampton.
All four are being held at a West Midlands police station.
The Army confirmed the arrests, and said it had supported the police-led operation.
An Army spokesperson added: "This is now the subject of a civilian police investigation and it would be inappropriate to comment further."
The BBC understands three of the soldiers arrested are from the Royal Anglian Regiment.
Two of them were arrested in Cyprus, and the other two were detained in Ipswich and Brecon.
Police said the arrests were pre-planned and intelligence-led, and there had been no threat to the public's safety.
They said they were continuing to search several properties.
The men are being held on suspicion of being concerned in the commission, preparation and instigation of acts of terrorism under Section 41 of the Terrorism Act 2000; namely on suspicion of being members of a proscribed organisation.
Who are National Action?
By Dominic Casciani, BBC home affairs correspondent
National Action became the first British neo-Nazi group to be banned last December after Home Secretary Amber Rudd said it was promoting violence and acts of terrorism.
Members and supporters applauded the murder of Jo Cox MP by a white supremacist - and the group had carried out a series of small, but confrontational, demonstrations in towns and cities throughout England.
One of its most notorious events saw masked members - many of them very young men - gathering outside York Minster to make Hitler salutes.
Since it was banned, detectives have been carrying out more and more investigations into the group which, to all intents and purposes, has organised itself in a similar way to the banned al Muhajiroun network - the extremist Islamist youth movement.
Both have used social media to target young people, attracting them with a simplistic us-and-them message designed to make them angry.
Being a member of - or inviting support for - a proscribed organisation is a criminal offence carrying a sentence of up to 10 years in prison.
There are 71 such groups listed by the Home Office on its register.
They include a range of international and national groups, of which National Action was the first far-right group to be banned.
It describes itself as a "National Socialist youth organisation" and says its movement is aimed at the "broken right-wing".
The official register says it was established in 2013 and has branches across the UK which "conduct provocative street demonstrations and stunts aimed at intimidating local communities".
Its online material contains extremely violent imagery and language and it condones and glorifies those who have used extreme violence for political or ideological ends, the Home Office says.
That included tweets in 2016 about the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox, who was stabbed and shot by Thomas Mair. One such tweet said there were "only 649 MPs to go".
Ms Rudd called it "a racist, anti-Semitic and homophobic organisation".
///
Daca Dreamers: US scraps young undocumented immigrants scheme - BBC News, September 2017
An Obama-era scheme to protect young undocumented immigrants is to be scrapped, US Attorney General Jeff Sessions has announced.
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) programme was introduced five years ago.
It guards some 800,000 so-called "Dreamers", mostly from Latin American countries, against deportation, providing work and study permits.
But critics say it amounts to an amnesty for illegal immigrants.
US President Donald Trump took a hard line on immigration while campaigning for office last year and said he planned to "immediately terminate" Daca if elected.
However, since then he has said he finds the subject "very, very tough".
In a stinging attack on Daca, Mr Sessions described the policy introduced by President Barack Obama it as an "open-ended circumvention of immigration laws" and a "unilateral executive amnesty".
"The nation must set a limit on how many immigrants we admit each year," he said.
"We cannot admit everyone who would like to come here, it's just that simple."
What is Daca?
The programme protects young illegal immigrants in the US from deportation and provides temporary permits for work and study.
In order to qualify for Daca, applicants under the age of 30 submit personal information to the Department of Homeland Security.
They must go through an FBI background check and have a clean criminal background, and either be in school, recently graduated or have been honourably discharged from the military.
In exchange, the US government agrees to "defer" any action on their immigration status for a period of two years.
///
Meghan Markle: 'Prince Harry and I are in love' - BBC News, September 2017
Actress Meghan Markle has spoken about her love for Prince Harry in public for the first time, saying: "Personally, I love a great love story."
The star of US drama Suits told Vanity Fair the pair are enjoying "special" time together.
"We're two people who are really happy and in love," the 36-year-old said.
Markle revealed she and the prince had been in a relationship for six months before the rest of the world found out at the end of 2016.
There was a media frenzy when it was revealed Harry was dating the US star, the pair having met in July last year.
The intense interest prompted the prince to issue a statement, attacking the press for subjecting his girlfriend to a "wave of abuse and harassment".
'This is our time'
She admitted to Vanity Fair that the situation "has its challenges" and "comes in waves", and that "some days it can feel more challenging than others".
"Right out of the gate it was surprising the way things changed," said Markle, who plays lawyer Rachel Zane in the TV drama.
"But I still have this support system all around me, and, of course, my boyfriend's support."
She says she doesn't read any articles about her - either about her private life or her work.
"I haven't even read press for Suits. The people who are close to me anchor me in knowing who I am. The rest is noise."
Asked how she handles tabloid speculation about herself and Harry, Markle said: "We were very quietly dating for about six months before it became news, and I was working during that whole time, and the only thing that changed was people's perception.
"Nothing about me changed. I'm still the same person that I am, and I've never defined myself by my relationship."
She's aware however, that as the relationship progresses, the spotlight might turn more on to her and the prince.
"We're a couple," she said. "We're in love. I'm sure there will be a time when we will have to come forward and present ourselves and have stories to tell, but I hope what people will understand is that this is our time.
"This is for us. It's part of what makes it so special, that it's just ours. But we're happy. Personally, I love a great love story."
///
Sir Bruce Forsyth's private funeral held - BBC News, September 2017
Family and friends have said farewell to Sir Bruce Forsyth at a private funeral for the veteran entertainer.
The star's manager confirmed to BBC News that the service took place on Monday, but declined to give any more details.
A public memorial service is expected to be held in due course for fans to pay their respects.
There will also be a tribute on Strictly Come Dancing when it returns to BBC One on Saturday.
Sir Bruce, who co-hosted the dance show until 2014, died on 18 August at the age of 89.
Strictly executive producer Louise Rainbow has promised that the tribute will include "a heartfelt performance from our Strictly professional dancers".
She added: "We all want to celebrate him and all that he loved about the show."
Sir Bruce's TV career stretched back to the 1950s and he became one of Britain's best-loved entertainers thanks to shows like Sunday Night at the London Palladium, The Generation Game, Play Your Cards Right and The Price Is Right.
///
Oxford and Cambridge top world university rankings - BBC News, September 2017
The researchers say the findings show "a widening gulf between the UK's super elite institutions and other universities", with just over half of the UK's top 200 institutions, dropping down the ranking.
Mr Baty said: "The UK higher education system is facing intense political pressure, with questions over the value for money provided by £9,250 tuition fees in England, our continued attractiveness to international students, the flow of research funding and academic talent post-Brexit, and even levels of vice-chancellors' pay.
"But one thing this new data makes absolutely clear is that the UK has many of the very best universities in the world and it has one of the world's strongest higher education systems.
"The data shows UK universities are consistently producing ground-breaking new research which is driving innovation, they are attracting international students and academic talent and are providing a world-class teaching environment.
"They are a huge national asset, and one that the country can ill-afford to undermine at a time when its place in the global order is under intense scrutiny."
Two UK universities occupy the top spots in a global ranking for the first time.
The University of Oxford is top of the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, with Cambridge University second, up from fourth place last year.
A key factor in the rankings is income and both universities saw this rise in the past year, partly in the form of European Union research grants.
But this income could fall with Brexit, warned rankings director Phil Baty.
Times Higher Education, which compiles the rankings, said that margins were extremely tight at the top, with all the top-ranked institutions excelling against measures in teaching, research, citations, international outlook and income.
But Oxford and Cambridge saw significant increases in their total institutional income - up 24% and 11% respectively while their nearest rivals, the California Institute of Technology and Stanford University saw falls in income.
The researchers also point out that about a quarter of Cambridge's research income, and a fifth of Oxford's, come in the form of EU grants - a factor which they say underlines the risk Brexit could pose to the global performance of the UK's leading universities.
The top of the global ranking of 1,000 universities in 77 countries is dominated by US institutions.
Other UK universities in the top 50 are Imperial College London in eighth place; University College London, 16th; London School of Economics and Political Science, 25th; University of Edinburgh, 27th; and King's College London, 36th.
///
Duchess wins damages over topless photos - BBC News, September 2017
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have been awarded 100,000 euros (£92K) in damages after a French magazine printed topless pictures of the Duchess.
The French court ruled the images, taken as the royal couple holidayed in Provence five years ago, were an invasion of their privacy.
The judge awarded the royal couple 50,000 euros each in damages.
She also fined Closer magazine's editor and owner 45,000 euros - the maximum amount allowed.
The damages fall short of the 1.6 million euros (£1.5m) sought by the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge's lawyers.
Long-lens images of Catherine sunbathing on a terrace were published on the front and inside pages of the Closer publication in 2012.
Presiding judge Florence Lasserre-Jeannin also instructed regional newspaper La Provence, which printed images of the Duchess in her swimwear, to pay 3,000 euros in damages during the hearing at the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Nanterre.
The judgement follows the trial of six people, including photographers and the former editor of Closer, which began in May.
All six defendants were convicted of charges relating to the taking and publication of the images.
A statement from Prince William was read at the trial in May.
The duke said the invasion of privacy was "all the more painful" given his mother's experience with the paparazzi.
The guilty verdict was certainly not a surprise. It's almost a game these magazine play. They get the fines but they think it's worth it - they get the extra sales from the photographs they publish.
What was interesting about this case was that the royal couple and their lawyers here were pushing for a much, much larger amount in damages. They were, in effect, saying the royal couple is different.
There was an attempt to turn this into a different kind of affair, one in which there would be almost punitive damages awarded against Closer magazine, damages that would really inhibit and deter it from doing a similar sort of thing in the future.
In the end, though the damages are substantial, they are not really out of line with similar cases in the past. It isn't this groundbreaking precedent-setting kind of damages which would really act as a deterrent to Closer magazine and others like it in the future.
///
How the demand for sand is killing rivers - BBC News, September 2017
You cannot have concrete without sand. River beds are being dug up across Africa to fuel a building boom, with little thought for what this means for the health of the river, and those who depend on it, as Harriet Constable found in Kenya.
Sand. The word conjures happy holiday memories: building castles from it; watching nervous crabs scuttle across it; digging giant holes in it, and then hiding in them and leaping out at opportune moments to terrify unknowing relatives. Sand is the make up of glittering beaches, hundreds of thousands of years of weathering to create millions and millions of tiny, sparkling, and yet seemingly insignificant particles. Sand is infinite, surely. And yet the world is running out.
It's obvious when you think about it. All the major building materials - concrete, bricks, glass, are made using sand. Exploding population numbers and the knock on need for development have made sand the second most used natural commodity on the planet after water. Billions and billions of tonnes are being used across the globe.
So much so that a UN report estimated global sand use in 2012 alone could have created a concrete wall 27m high by 27m wide around the equator. We need not go to the beach to be surrounded by sand - our cities are essentially giant towering sand castles disguised in concrete.
The sand used for construction comes mainly from riverbeds and oceans. Desert sand, it turns out, is too smooth for the mix. Huge projects quickly exhausted Dubai's marine sand supply, so, despite being a city built on sand, it now imports the material from Australia. The irony: sand has become such a precious commodity it is literally being sold to the Arabs.
Innocent as sand may seem, the immense demand for it is causing loss of livelihoods, loss of ecosystems and even deaths.
In India, a black market for sand harvesting has emerged, operated by violent sand mafias. In China, the country's biggest freshwater lake - Poyang Lake - is drying up due to sand dredging. Hundreds of locals rely on the lake for fish, as do the millions of migratory birds that stop here each year.
In Kenya, sand dredging from the riverbeds of poor rural counties like Makueni is leaving some communities without access to water.
With the country's population expected to double in the next 40 years, massive infrastructure projects like Kenya's new Standard Gauge Railway are necessary. But they need millions of tonnes of sand. Kenya's coast and inland rivers have all been exploited in recent years, but the effect in Makueni has been particularly acute.
Throughout the year, temperatures in Makueni soar to over 35C (95F). Seasonal, sand-filled rivers snake their way through the arid land. During the rainy season, water percolates through and is stored underneath. During the dry season, the population of nearly one million people dig holes in the sand to extract water to survive. However, when enough sand is harvested, only the bedrock remains, and during the rainy season the water simply rushes across it. No water is stored.
I visited several sand harvesting sites across the county earlier this year. "We call this the dead river," a local called Anthony told me, staring over the steep, reddish-brown cliff edge into the barren riverbed at Kilome Ikolya River in Makueni.
A couple of years ago this river was flat. Now, there is sheer drop of about 10m from the top of the bank to the riverbed. Tree roots jut out awkwardly from the cliff face, and along the dry, meandering river, bedrock sticks out of the ground, glistening in the sunshine. "No-one can get water here now," Anthony said.
For some, sand is life, and for others, sand is money. In a poor area with few employment opportunities, the reality of what desperate humans will do is stark.
Local Police Officer Geoffrey Kasyoki was well known in his community for trying to stop illegal sand harvesting in Makueni. In February 2011 he was set upon by a group of young men in broad daylight. They shot him with poisoned arrows, crushed his head and slashed his skin.
Standing over her husband's grave, his widow Irene told me, "He was killed to send a message to the community from the sand harvesters: do not try to stop us". Her chest heaved in and out, shuddering with sobs, and she reached out to touch the sandy mound of earth under which he is buried.
As Anthony and I walked further along the riverbed, we came across harvesters labouring under the baking midday sun, shovelling sand into a pile ready for a truck to collect it.
While I watched and wondered whether sand could soon become the stuff of distant childhood memories, others around me had more pressing concerns. For them, sand could mean the difference between eating and going hungry, whether they'd have drinking water or not, or whether they'd ever see their loved ones again.
///
My partner vanished without warning. I had to find him - Part One - BBC News, August 2017
Every year, thousands of Britons vanish from their lives. Kirsty and Zack had just celebrated the birth of their son when Zack suddenly walked out of their home. This is the story of how Kirsty tried to track him down.
It's breakfast time and Zack, 28, is running late for his job in a High Street bank. His partner, 34-year-old Kirsty, tells him to hurry up, but he's laughing. He gives Kirsty a kiss and says goodbye to the children - a seven-year-old and a baby of just five weeks. As he walks out to the street, the eldest child goes to the window and makes heart shapes with her hands to Zack below. It's an ordinary morning.
A couple of hours later, Kirsty receives a text message from Zack to say he's not coming back.
The morning he disappears, Zack phones his work to say he can't come in. Instead, he walks into a police station and tells them if anyone reports him missing, he doesn't want to be found.
Kirsty discovers this when she fills in a missing person form. It's immediately sent out to police stations around the country. A few minutes later, Kirsty is told that Zack is, in fact, alive and well but doesn't want her to know where he is.
"It made me cry because it was so cold," says Kirsty.
She's particularly worried because Zack has been diagnosed as bipolar.
"I knew he wasn't well," she says. But he would have appeared in control when the police saw him.
When Zack walked out of their flat, he took nothing with him - including the medicine he'd been prescribed. Kirsty knows that without it he'll suffer cold sweats and depression.
At this point, her thoughts are swinging wildly from worrying about Zack's health to wondering if he just walked out on them all.
Is he ill? Or has he done a runner?
The couple have been together for five years. They first met at university, where Kirsty remembers Zack as a brilliant student who spent his spare time writing plays.
Kirsty's eldest child, her seven-year old daughter, is from another relationship. Before their son was born, they had all been staying with her parents, but had recently found a flat to move into. Zack had only been in the new flat for two nights before he disappeared.
Their home is full of piles of books scattered around the floor, waiting to be put up on shelves.
But Kirsty's mind is preoccupied with her search for Zack.
She makes a missing poster with his photograph and contacts local doctors to see if he has registered anywhere. She deposits small amounts of money into his bank account - just so she can write short messages in the 15-character reference field. She feels she's clutching at straws.
Most of all, she's concerned about his health.
"If he's in a little studio apartment somewhere and he's done himself in, who actually is going to find him?" she asks.
Zack has now been missing for 34 days.
Kirsty still has no idea where he is, but a routine call to the Child Support Agency leaves her wondering if he's ill.
To her surprise, she's told they have a reliable address for Zack.
Her first feeling is shock as she realises her partner is probably safe and well. And then frustration sinks in - everyone else seems to have access to Zack's address and new life apart from her.
"I thought we were planning on this future together," she says.
"It didn't involve him doing a runner. I feel cheated. He's left me with all this responsibility."
Then, to add to her sense of alienation, she discovers several email accounts Zack has set up using both their names together.
"Is this a game of cat and mouse?" she wonders. "Is he getting a little bit of sick pleasure knowing that he is traceable, but it's all very vague?"
She's able to hack into one of the accounts because Zack has used a password she knows. Inside she finds an email that includes part of a postcode which she tracks down to a village outside Nottingham.
Kirsty believes her husband is renting a cheap flat there and thinks about confronting him.
Zack has now been missing for 41 days.
Kirsty discusses her plan to go to Nottingham with her brother. He tries to talk her out of it.
"We just don't know why he left or anything that was going on in his head," he says.
About six months ago, Kirsty noticed money was going missing from Zack's account. He admitted he'd been gambling online. Kirsty's brother thinks he may have an addiction problem - something Kirsty finds hard to believe.
"I think he was gambling and you've got a new kid and the rent was due and he was too scared to explain to you he didn't have it, so he ran away," says her brother.
But Kirsty's mind is made up. It takes her eight hours to reach the village, driving through heavy traffic with her baby in the back seat of her car.
She's booked a room in a hotel on the road where she thinks Zack is living. And she's made a flyer with pictures of her and Zack, and Zack with her daughter - Zack as a family man - which she plans to distribute on the road.
She admits she included pictures of herself and her children just in case Zack is with another woman - she wants that woman to know they exist. The flyer also has a personal message on.
"I've said it's the hardest letter I've ever had to write, and I've only got one shot at getting it right," says Kirsty.
"I've said I'm staying up the road in this hotel until tomorrow afternoon and I'd really like to see him."
The next morning, there's a man waiting to see her in the hotel lobby. For a moment, Kirsty thinks it could be Zack. But it's a stranger who tells her he's read her flyer and hasn't seen her partner. He just wanted to let her know so she wouldn't hold out false hope.
Kirsty returns home.
"I just think I've got to not expect to hear anything for a long time," she says.
Zack has now been missing for 45 days.
Suddenly Kirsty receives a message from the NHS advice service, 111.
A woman working there says she has received a call from a man in the city of Bath who said he could only remember his name and age. The woman Googled this information and saw that Kirsty was searching for him.
This seems like the first concrete lead. But if it is Zack, he appears to be suffering from amnesia.
Kirsty decides to take this information to the police.
She's armed with further confirmation that Zack is in Bath. After posting a message on Facebook, she hears from two Bath-based hairdressers who say they are convinced that Zack was in their salon.
But her meeting with the police doesn't go well and Kirsty doesn't think they believe her.
"They look at you as though you've got no right to be here," she says.
And then the station sergeant says he wants to speak to her in private.
He tells her that Zack has been in touch. Police officers went to see him this morning and he told them he doesn't want Kirsty to know where he is. He says he's not ready to come back.
Kirsty is devastated. She doesn't understand why Zack would phone 111 and say he's confused, but then tell the police he's ok.
At the back of her mind is the thought that she must have been a really bad girlfriend. This is Zack's first serious relationship and she wonders whether she forced too much responsibility on him too early. When they first got together, her little girl was still a baby so they couldn't do the things that new couples often do - enjoy lie-ins, go away for the weekend.
But at the same time, she remembers what it was like when Zack last experienced a bipolar episode. Then he said he wanted to hurt her because she was so good. She wonders if he's trying to hurt her now.
Then, that night, Kirsty gets a text message from an unknown number.
Whoever it is knows about the messages she's been leaving in Zack's bank account. This person says they're confused and they're planning to go to the police. They say they'll call Kirsty straight afterwards. It's 11pm. Kirsty doesn't hear from them again.
She's convinced the person is Zack, but she doesn't believe he has amnesia.
The next night she receives a phone call.
For a couple of seconds there's silence, then the caller hangs up. The phone rings again and it's Zack. Finally Kirsty has some answers.
During their hour-and-a-half conversation Zack says he's trying to remember things. He knows his name and age but only vaguely remembers Kirsty. They agree that Kirsty will pick him up the next day.
But Kirsty doesn't hear from him again.
Christmas comes and goes without Zack.
Kirsty keeps checking his email accounts and sees that he has been using online gambling sites frequently.
He's been placing small bets of £5 and £6, but he's been placing a lot of them, sometimes 20 a day.
Then suddenly she sees that Zack has started betting £500 in one day.
Zack has now been missing for 69 days.
Out of the blue, Kirsty receives a call from an unknown doctor saying Zack has been with him for the past 10 days. Zack was placed in his care by an outreach charity who picked him up off the streets.
"I'm so relieved tonight to know that people are looking after him now," she says.
Kirsty finds out Zack has been in Bath, and then Hertfordshire, and Essex. There's no mention of Nottingham. Some of the time he's been working and paying for accommodation. Other times he's been loitering, unclear of where to go. The doctor tells her that he's very unwell, flipping between personalities and he genuinely can't remember things.
"He wasn't lying," says Kirsty, relieved.
Finally she has a number she can call Zack on. When they talk he asks her lots of questions about how they met and what their life was like.
Zack describes how he has been wandering around following a voice inside his head that said it could take him home. But each time he followed it, he became more lost.
Then, 76 days after he walked out of her life, Kirsty is told that Zack is well enough to go home.
A month later, Kirsty is still getting used to having Zack back. She believes the reason he left was because of the upheaval of having a new baby and moving house at the same time.
"It's all really hazy," says Zack.
"It was Bath first of all, then it was Canada Water, then after that Essex. I know that things would have been going on, but I don't remember them and it's all really grey."
He does remember bits of being away - going to the police station, and being on a bus - but feels disconnected from himself.
At one point, he remembers living outside in the woods with nothing but a coat to protect him.
He describes the experience as being "split". It was as if he was standing outside himself looking in. Especially when he was making bets with huge sums of money.
"I would have made lots of plans," he says. "But shortly after leaving, I found myself homeless. So how planned was it?"
Even though Zack still suffers from what he describes as a weird energy in his mind, he says he can distract himself from it. Being back on medication has helped.
"I'm seeing doctors and I'm seeing a psychiatrist who's very good. My concern now is being a good dad and a good partner," he says.
But Kirsty and Zack's relationship remains fragile. She says she's worried he might leave again and if he does, this time she won't try to find him. She finds it hard to trust him, especially after reading the emails in his secret accounts which she was clearly not meant to see.
One of the saddest things is how some of her family and friends are still suspicious of her partner. Her best friend recently unfriended her on Facebook because she said she couldn't bear to see pictures of Zack and Kirsty looking happy together after all Kirsty had been through.
Kirsty doesn't know if her relationship will work out.
"One thing I'm really certain of is this won't happen again. He wouldn't just go," she says.
"But he might start gambling, he might start lying… that's something I can't control, but also can't have around me."
///
Does the world need polymaths? BBC News - August 2017
Two hundred years ago, it was still possible for one person to be a leader in several different fields of inquiry. Today that is no longer the case. So is there a role in today's world for the polymath - someone who knows a lot about a lot of things?
"The winner of the 1964 Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, which British X-Ray crystallographer was instrumental in…"
"Man produces evil as a bee produces honey. These are the words of which Nobel laureate, born in Cornwall in 1911, his novels include Pincher Martin, the Inheritors and Rites of…"
Obviously you don't need to hear the rest of these questions to know the answers. At least, not if you're Eric Monkman or Bobby Seagull. Seagull's fist-pumping and natty dressing, and Monkman's furrowed brow, flashing teeth, contorted facial expressions and vocal delivery - like a fog horn with a hangover - made these two young men the stars of the last University Challenge competition.
"Wolfson, Monkman" and "Emmanuel, Seagull" became familiar phrases, Monkmania became a hashtag. They squared off as opposing captains in the semi-finals (though in the final itself, the team from Balliol College, Oxford triumphed).
At Cambridge, Monkman and Seagull forged a most unlikely friendship. The Canadian, Eric Monkman, is the middle-class son of two doctors. Bobby Seagull's family originate in Kerala, India, and he was raised in a working-class part of east London, before gaining a scholarship to Britain's most elite private school, Eton. "If I got married tomorrow, I'd ask Eric to be my best man," says Seagull.
They're still recognised in the street. "People often ask me, do you intimidate people with your knowledge," says Monkman. "But the opposite is the case. I have wide knowledge but no deep expertise. I am intimidated by experts." Seagull, like Monkman, feels an intense pressure to specialise. They regard themselves as Jacks-of-all-Trades, without being master of one. "When I was young what I really wanted to do was know a lot about a lot," says Monkman. "Now I feel that if I want to make a novel contribution to society I need to know a great deal about one tiny thing."
The belief that researchers need to specialise goes back at least two centuries. From the beginning of the 19th Century, research has primarily been the preserve of universities. Ever since, says Stefan Collini, Professor of Intellectual History and English Literature at Cambridge University, researchers have labels attached to them. "They're professor of this or that, and you get a much more self-conscious sense of the institutional divides between domains of knowledge."
Before then, there were some polymaths who made original contributions in multiple areas. The word polymath stems from the Greek, polus, meaning "much" or "many" and mathe, meaning "learning". The first use of the word has been traced to the 17th Century. From the Renaissance, people such as Leonardo da Vinci - painter, sculptor, architect, physicist, anatomist, philosopher, geologist and biologist - gave rise to a synonym of polymath, the "Renaissance man".
One polymath/Renaissance Man was Thomas Young (1773-1829), the subject of a biography by Andrew Robinson entitled The Last Man Who Knew Everything. Young was a physician and physicist, whose achievements were breathtaking. He established the wave theory of light, undertook pioneering work in optics and studied 400 languages, helped decode the hieroglyphs on the Rosetta Stone - and much, much more. And to confound any notion that he was a sort of 19th Century uber-geek, he was also an accomplished dancer and gymnast.
These days, any ambition to contribute to many disciplines is probably unrealistic. It takes years of immersion just to reach the boundary of our current knowledge in any one area. Today's polymaths might share the same personal qualities as Thomas Young - an abundance of grey matter, of course, combined with relentless curiosity and a tendency to workaholicism (Young barely slept) - but they are repositories of scholarship rather than contributors to it.
So is there still a useful role for today's clever-clog - besides ringer in the pub quiz team?
Stefan Collini says that in many Western societies "there is a populist hostility to expertise in public life". It may be that polymaths, with their broader gaze, have an important role in communicating specialist fields. What's more, with ever narrowing specialism there is a need for generalists to synthesise information, to make connections between the discipline silos.
A contemporary polymath, the American academic Jared Diamond, drew on his interest in geography, evolution, anthropology, history and botany, to develop a theory explaining how it was that Eurasian and North African civilisations came to conquer others. It was turned into a best-selling book, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.
Diamond is one of Stephen Fry's favourite polymaths. Fry - actor, comedian, writer and general egghead - is himself on the polymathic spectrum. He says he shares a personality trait with other polymaths - inquisitiveness. "If you know a lot, it's because you're curious," he says. "You have this impulse to know and, therefore, things stick to you. You put on, as it were, epistemological weight. I have always been fantastically greedy to know things."
Monkman and Seagull love knowing a lot of stuff. You might find them reading about the French Revolution one day, and about genetics or astronomy the next. Despite their anxiety about spreading themselves too thin, they share Fry's appetite to know. It's an overwhelming craving, likely to frustrate any countervailing drive to master one topic.
By the way. The answer to those two questions. Dorothy Hodgkin was the crystallographer, and William Golding the novelist. But you knew that anyway.
///
Why do people swear? - BBC News, February 2017
The English language contains an alphabet soup of swear words. Those of a sweary disposition can draw upon the A-word, the B-word, the C-word, the F-word, the S-word, the W-word and many more. So here's a puzzle - if you see the F-word spelled out with all four letters, are you more offended than when you read F with asterisks?
It seems many people are. But why? After all, you presumably know what F with asterisks stands for. It has the same meaning as the non-asterisked version.
The BBC tries to avoid swear words whenever possible, but on the rare occasions that they are considered integral to the story, they are used without the asterisks. Some other news outlets, such as The Times do adopt the asterisk convention and only print swear words when they are quoting other people. This reflects the view that using swear words is more offensive than merely mentioning them. The paper's journalists mention the swear words used by others, but do not use them themselves.
But to understand why the full-frontal swear word might be considered worse than its pale asterisked imitator, we first need to define what a swear word is.
By definition, swear words are offensive. If a word, over time, ceases to be offensive, then it falls out of use as a swear word. Offence alone is not enough, though, for we can offend with language without swearing. The N-word, for example, is what is called a slur: it is a derogatory term about an entire group. It is profoundly offensive, but it is not a swear word.
Philosopher Rebecca Roache says that as well as the ingredient of offence, swear words tend to have a cluster of other characteristics. We will often use swear words "to vent some emotion", she says. "If you're angry or particularly happy, swearing is a catharsis. Swearing also centres on taboos. Around the world swear words will tend to cluster around certain topics: lavatorial matters, sex, religion."
There's also a paradoxical component to swearing, says Roache. "As well as being taboo-breaking, swear words are taboo-breaking for the sake of taboo-breaking. The whole point is that you're not allowed to use them, but they exist just for that rule to be broken."
Words develop their power over time; it's a historical process. In the past, many swear words were linked to religion. But as countries like Britain have become increasingly secular, imprecations such as "Damn" and "Jesus Christ", have begun to lose their force. The Times leader writer, Oliver Kamm, author of Accidence Will Happen: The Non-Pedantic Guide to English, says that the swearing lexicon now draws less from religion and more from body effluvia. "There's a hierarchy of effluvia, according to how disgusting we find them in public. 'Shit' is worse than 'piss' which is worse than 'fart' which is worse than 'spit' which is not a taboo word at all. It's an interesting linguistic hypothesis that the taboos relate to how disease-ridden or dangerous or disgusting we find the effluvia themselves."
The emotional release from swearing has been measured in a variety of ways. It turns out that swearing helps mitigate pain. It is easier to keep an arm in ice-cold-water for longer if you are simultaneously effing and blinding. And those who speak more than one language, report that swearing in their first language is more satisfying, carrying, as it does, a bigger emotional punch.
Catharsis aside, swearing can boast other benefits. The claim has been made that swearing is bonding: a few blue words, uttered in a good-natured way, indicates and encourages intimacy. A very recent study suggests that people who swear are perceived as more trustworthy than those who are less potty-mouthed.
But back to the conundrum. If writing F with asterisks alleviates the offence of the full word why should this be? Roache says swearing is best viewed as a breach of etiquette. It is a little like putting your shoes on a table when you are the guest in someone's house. If you know it would offend, and do it anyway, you are guilty of showing insufficient respect.
"It doesn't matter that it's a swear word. Imagine meeting someone who has a fear of crisps, and who finds references to crisps traumatic. If you carry on talking about crisps in their presence, even after discovering about their phobia, you are sending a signal that you don't respect them, you don't have any concern for their feelings."
Using the F-with-asterisks version acknowledges that we are taking the feelings of others into account. By censoring the word we show respect. It's a view shared by Oliver Kamm, who endorses his newspaper's policy on asterisking swear words. Readers cannot help, he says, finding the full word "involuntarily off-putting".
Like most people, I find exposure to too many swear words disconcerting. So I'm off to wash my mouth out with soap.

